.START 

If one thing was clear in the chaos of Friday's market sell-off, it was that the collapse of the buy-out of UAL Corp. set the whole thing off.
But, it turns out, Wall Street -- quick to read tea leaves and quick to panic -- may have reached the wrong conclusion about the buy-out's unraveling. 

As word spread Friday that many of the world's biggest banks had refused to participate in the $6.79 billion leveraged transaction, the financial markets assumed the worst: If the management of a blue-chip outfit like the parent of United Airlines can't get financing, then takeovers in general must be headed toward extinction.
The market, already chastened by a number of leveraged buy-outs gone bad, responded in a flood of sell orders. 

Yet interviews with the bankers who turned down the UAL proposal suggest the market may have misinterpreted its significance.
The buy-out of UAL by a group made up of management, the pilots union and British Airways PLC, ran into difficulty because of its own unique problems, they say.
Banks didn't suddenly become unwilling to finance takeovers, they just didn't like the looks of this particular deal. 

Specifically, the bankers said that UAL's management and advisers pushed too hard, trying to keep too much of the potential profit for themselves.
The airline's top two officers, chief executive Stephen M. Wolf and chief financial officer John C. Pope, for example, would have made a total of more than $100 million on the buy-out through stock options they hold, even though their proposal called for them to put only $15 million of their own funds into the deal. 

Moreover, fees and interest rates paid to the banks would have been stingy -- far below those in comparable takeovers.
The banks also said they were worried that United's rosy projections of future income -- and therefore its ability to pay off the debt -- didn't adequately take into account the bumpy nature of the airline industry. 

From a lender's point of view, "it's one of the worst big takeover proposals we've seen," said an official of First Chicago Corp., one of the banks asked to finance the buy-out, which notably didn't include junk bonds.
Even so, banks such as First Chicago, which has a long history of ties to UAL, stretched their lending guidelines as far as possible in hopes of making the proposal work. "We really gave this thing nine looks," the First Chicago officer said. 

It was the job of A.D. Frazier, First Chicago's commercial lending chief, to call the buy-out group and put the best possible face on the news. "We called them back and said if they needed us -- if it would make a difference -- we'd come in," another officer familiar with the matter said. 

Of course, it wasn't even close.
Other U.S. banks and, more importantly, those in Japan, also said no.
In the end, the proposal never got far beyond the original financing promises made by Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp., which together had agreed to commit $3 billion and said they were "highly confident" they could raise an additional $4.2 billion. 

Representatives and advisers to the buy-out group, called Airline Acquisition Corp., met throughout the weekend in an effort to revise their $300-a-share offer.
But prospects of quickly putting together a new deal appeared bleak.
It is "still unclear whether this can be easily fixed," one official close to the transaction said yesterday afternoon.
A pilots union official said the group is likely to wait and see what the stock market does Monday before making any decisions. 

"We've got a lot of homework to do, a lot of work ahead of us," said H. Bruce Bernstein, a lawyer at Sidley & Austin in Chicago, which is representing the bank group. 

Both the banks' decision to decline financing and the stock market's reaction caught the buy-out group off guard.
Friday's dominoes began falling at 2:30 p.m., when the stock exchange halted trading in UAL, pending news.
The news came at 2:54.
Funds committed by banks for the buy-out "are not sufficient," the acquisition group announced.
UAL was trading at $279.75 at the time of the halt and never reopened for trading Friday.
However, it was later quoted by off-exchange market makers at as low as $230 a share. 

At 3:30, with the market now in a free fall, representatives of the buy-out group scrambled to a hastily called meeting at Citicorp's offices at 399 Park Avenue in New York.
The group was trying to assess what it would take to resuscitate the deal.
On the way to the session, some huddled around a Quotron machine that was in the hallway outside the meeting room. "The Dow's going down, down, down," said one observer in amazement. 

The meeting itself, held in the corporate finance department on the ninth floor, was disorganized, as members of Citicorp's and Chase's syndication departments called other banks trying to figure out why they had rejected the deal.
At 3:55, five minutes before the market closed, the meeting began.
Gathered around a long table that filled the huge conference room were about 30 people, including representatives of Citicorp, Chase Manhattan, United Airlines, British Airways, Lazard Freres & Co., Salomon Brothers Inc., Skadden Arps (Mr.
Wolf's counsel) and Paul Weiss (lawyer for the pilots union).
One person who wasn't present: Mr. Wolf himself who, confident that the deal would go through, was returning from Europe, where he had pitched the proposal to several big European banks. 

"People were surprised, shocked and upset," said an official at the meeting.
Mr. Wolf, reached at his Chicago home Saturday, declined to comment. 

As they met to review what had gone wrong, the buy-out group quickly discovered that one of the big roadblocks had been Japanese lenders.
Although they had provided the lion's share of the financing on the Northwest Airlines buy-out just a few months before, Japanese banks had said no to UAL. 

The Japanese apparently balked at several aspects of the proposal.
A senior executive at one of Japan's biggest banks says the UAL deal "was stretched.
It's a cyclical industry, and all the projections that the banks are working off are straight up.
So where's the cycle?" 

Japanese lenders also recently have grown more conservative toward highly leveraged transactions, partly because of the recent cash-squeeze at Canada's Campeau Corp. following its leveraged purchase of Federated Department Stores Inc. last year.
Japanese banks are worried that the government might issue restrictive guidelines unless the banks hold down the number of risky leveraged-buy-out loans they make, says a Japanese monetary official. "So, they are very cautious," he says. 

A third problem was the potential for labor unrest at UAL, something that makes the Japanese particularly skittish.
The Japanese banks were reminded of the labor tensions at UAL all last week.
On Wednesday, the machinists union asked the U.S. Labor Department to step in to stop the buy-out.
On Thursday, at their national convention in Las Vegas, machinists union leaders discussed launching an allout campaign against UAL Chairman Wolf specifically.
The machinists have opposed the buy-out because they weren't invited to participate in the deal and because they fear all the debt that would be taken on in the transaction would overburden the company. 

Machinists union leader John Peterpaul also made the union's views known in telephone conversations with representatives of Mitsubishi Bank, one of the Japanese banks that was considering participating in the financing.
In those conversations, he reiterated the union's position that it would seek significant wage increases in the round of contract talks set to begin next month. 

The Japanese banks, however, weren't the only ones worried.
At First Chicago, executives were sharply divided on whether the bank should participate -- and what consequences there would be if it rejected its longtime client. 

Among other things, the bank feared "we'd look like dogs" if United was able to piece together the financing and First Chicago was absent, a top lending officer said.
United's Mr. Pope was warning that just that could happen. "Pope told us there's no question the banks are going to sign up." 

As the Thursday afternoon deadline for banks neared, some lending officers at First Chicago remained in favor of joining the financing group, but the bank's "credit police" were opposed, citing the high degree of risk associated with the loan.
A vote of top officers, including Chairman Barry F. Sullivan, Thursday morning was strongly against the loan. 

One official close to the transaction said banks were worried about the amount of assets the buy-out group had to cover the loans.
He said in the NWA Inc. acquisition, banks were secured with well over $1 in assets for every $1 of loan exposure.
In the UAL transaction, however, a banker's loans would have been secured with less than $1 in assets for every dollar of loans. 

Another problem: The buy-out group's financial projections didn't assume any type of recession in the near future.
For instance, the group projected that revenue would increase nearly 10% annually over the next few years.
It estimated that yields -- the amount of income the airline takes in on ticket sales -- would increase an average of 3.5% a year, despite the ups and downs the industry has suffered in the last 10 years. 

The projections also assumed that load factors -- the number of seats filled per aircraft -- would remain a stable 66.7% or thereabouts, even though domestic travel has been weakening. 

According to a machinists union analysis of the transaction that will be presented to the Department of Transportation and a House Aviation subcommittee later this week, a "mild recession" would result in the company's taking in $3.5 billion less cash in the next four years than forecast by the buy-out group. 

Clearly, any new bid will have to include more profit for lenders and that probably means less cash for UAL shareholders, including the heavily stock-optioned Messrs.
Wolf and Pope. 

Citicorp, the lead bank on the financing proposal, meanwhile, has a resounding flop on its hands.
It agreed to put up $2 billion itself, while co-lead Chase Manhattan agreed to provide $1 billion.
The two New York banks have already been paid combined fees of $8 million for the commitments. 

Citicorp and Chase told the buy-out group they were "highly confident" they could raise the remaining $4.2 billion needed to finance the deal. (The $7.2 billion the banks said they needed includes some refinancing of existing debt, and is therefore greater than the $6.79 billion offered for UAL.) Citibank's confidence was bolstered as recently as 10 days ago when representatives of 120 banks that had expressed interest in the UAL transaction attended a meeting with Citibank representatives. "Ninety percent of the questions asked were friendly," said a person who attended. "There were a lot of indications both before and after that this was a deal people thought well of." 

But Citibank's confidence may also have bordered on arrogance, other bankers contend.
The recent buy-out financing of NWA, Northwest Airlines' parent, for instance, was a much more collaborative effort among several U.S. banks.
It was a far safer deal for lenders, since NWA had a healthier cash flow and more collateral on hand.
And banks' fees were much higher as well.
No wonder, then, that lenders lined up to participate. 

"Perhaps lenders are finally recognizing that the stream of airline cash flow may be less predictable and a higher risk than previously considered," said Karen Firestone, a money manager at Fidelity Investments in Boston. 

Ms. Firestone added, "In the same week that USAir announces they might lose money in the quarter, United is trying to get money for a $300-a-share buy-out.
It's kind of like, what's wrong with this picture?" 

According to bankers and others familiar with the financing proposal, several things need to be fixed: 

Fees paid to the banks, set at about 1.5% of loans, are low compared with other buy-outs, which have paid 2% to 2.5%.
Because buy-out loans often get refinanced -- and thus paid off -- ahead of schedule, banks can't count on years of interest income from these loans.
They like deals to be "front-loaded" with fees.
What's more, fees in the UAL proposal weren't structured to encourage banks to commit to lending large amounts of money. 

The interest rate promised the banks was also relatively low; 2% over the rate banks charge each other in London, known as LIBOR.
And bankers were concerned that there weren't any junk bondholders or other buyers of subordinated debt standing between potential losses and the banks' senior loans. "Most of these leveraged deals have been done with a pretty heavy layer of junk," a First Chicago executive said. "This one has zippo." 

Because the junk bond market has ground to a halt since Campeau's problems were made manifest, so-called bridge loans from Wall Street firms or other sources could be used for subordinated debt in the UAL deal. 

In the meantime, though, airline executives, union officials, lawyers, investment bankers and even the machinists will have one eye on United and one eye on the stock market they helped to tank.
Says an official working on the buy-out: "As time goes by, you have to get more worried." 

Randall Smith and Michael R. Sesit contributed to this article. 

