.START 

After a long day tending the searing, blackened furnaces of the Panzhihua Iron & Steel Co., Li Wankui would like to relax away from the factory.
But in these parts, the factory is everywhere. 

It is employer, political czar and dance-committee chairman.
Inside the sprawling compounds that house 55,000 workers and their families, the factory operates the schools, restaurants, hospital and activities center.
The factory sells Mr. Li his food and furniture and publishes his newspaper.
It even restricts him and his wife to one child. 

Sitting at home with his family around the dining table, Mr. Li turns on the evening news. "This is the Panzhihua Factory broadcasting station," a perky anchorwoman says. "And here's what happened today at our factory." 

Panzhihua is the ultimate company town.
Nestled in the remote mountains of southern Sichuan province about 1,200 miles southwest of Beijing, it is virtually cut off from the rest of China.
With few businesses nearby, it's up to factory leaders to build high-rise housing and organize sports meets.
They truck in fresh fish from the east coast and import television sets from Japan. "A Chinese factory director could be a mayor in the U.S.," says Mr. Li. "But I don't think an American mayor could handle a Chinese factory." 

Despite a decade-long attempt to revamp the socialist economy, China's mega-welfare state is alive and well.
Health care is free, housing costs just pennies and food is heavily subsidized.
At Panzhihua, as in other big state-run factories, workers still can count on a cradle-to-grave safety net.
Factory officials estimate that more than 10% of the work force here is redundant, but layoffs aren't allowed.
Even factory workers' children are guaranteed jobs.
The industrial monoliths are so deeply involved in the welfare system that China's leaders may never be able to modernize them, despite their glaring economic inefficiency.
Though the Panzhihua factory itself is profitable, many such enterprises aren't.
Subsidies for money-losing enterprises totaled $18 billion last year, or about one-third the total state revenue. 

Life in the Panzhihua factory beats a regular rhythm, and fully absorbs workers such as Mr. Li.
A muscular 38-year-old, he rises each morning at 6 a.m. to prepare for his shift. (He is entitled to one day off after each seven days of work.) 

Throwing on sweat pants and a T-shirt, he pops downstairs to a food shop, one of dozens run by the factory in Panzhihua's residential area.
Mr. Li, whose pay is the equivalent of about $80 a month, buys steamed buns and rice porridge for his family.
Breakfast for three costs a quarter. 

After eating, he heads to the factory.
Panzhihua provides free bus service, but he prefers the 20-minute walk.
At the gate of the factory, a huge sign greets Mr. Li and his co-workers: "Happily, happily come to work!" 

Donning denims and a hard hat, he heads to the steel-making furnace.
Since the temperature next to it can reach 540 degrees Fahrenheit, Panzhihua Iron & Steel provides workers as many free orange-flavored soft drinks as they want.
The factory produces the drinks in-house. 

At lunchtime, Mr. Li walks to one of the 59 cafeterias the factory operates.
It's a chaotic scene.
Scraps of meat and bones litter the bare concrete floor.
A slop-bucket at the doorway is filled with a liquid turned blood-red from Sichuan peppers and hot sauce.
The place doesn't look like much, but the food is good, and cheap.
For about 30 cents, Mr. Li buys a bowl of pork, vegetables and rice. 

At the end of Mr. Li's workday, as a new shift prepares to take over, the factory's propaganda officials go to work.
For half an hour they relate to groups of workers the latest news and views from the Communist Party.
They read speeches from top leaders and slam U.S. sanctions on China imposed after the June 4 massacre of pro-democracy protesters in Beijing. "We want to make sure that workers have a correct opinion about events," says Yuan Changyong, the local Party chief. 

The propagandists also do their part in the national effort to limit births.
Teams of officials track the contraceptive methods their workers employ and even chart menstrual cycles of female employees.
They work by persuasion and coercion, alternating doses of propaganda with threats of financial penalties for "unplanned" second births. 

Zhang Shanyun, one of Mr. Li's bosses, knows the system well.
Like many married workers, Mr. Zhang lives alone at the factory.
His wife remains in the countryside, tending the farm land they possess.
Whenever Mr. Zhang wants to return to his farm, he must fill out a form detailing what kind of birth-control device he and his wife will use.
The document must be certified by factory officials and shown to leaders in his wife's village. "No document, no visit," smiles Li Jihong, who heads birth-control efforts at the factory. 

Mr. Li, however, is able to live with his wife full-time.
When he returns home, he ties on an apron and begins to prepare dinner for his family.
Most of the food comes to him via the factory, which buys 80 million tons of produce a year.
The factory sells to workers at cost, which means prices are about 50% below what the handful of independent local merchants charge. 

For big occasions, the factory brings in special treats.
Earlier this year, officials shipped in fresh crabs from Guangdong province.
It turned out that few workers here in the hills of Sichuan had ever seen them, so the factory TV station ran a broadcast on the correct way to eat Guangdong crabs. 

The Li family home is a simple, two-room apartment with bare concrete floors and whitewashed walls.
The basic furniture is provided by the factory, for five cents a month.
Most workers get a bed, desk and bureau.
Engineers also get a bookcase. 

Mr. Li's wife, Xia Huaqiong, also works at the factory, tending the water meters during the graveyard shift.
There are few prospects for upward mobility, and Mr. Li's daughter, seven-year-old Li Shu, is certain to toil at the factory too someday, as are more than 10,000 of the workers' children. 

Li Shu is in the second grade at the Xiangyang Village Elementary School for Workers' Children, one of 31 schools subsidized by the factory at a cost of more than half a million dollars a year.
Her tuition is about $1 a semester. 

Mr. Li says he is content living in this one-company town.
But he concedes that the pressures of the all-powerful factory sometimes are tough to bear.
He could do with more excitement, he says.
Most evenings after the news, he leaves his wife in front of the TV set and wanders restlessly around his quiet neighborhood.
He pauses frequently to greet familiar faces: co-workers from the factory. 

Inevitably, he is drawn to the Cultural Center, a drab, five-story structure with meeting rooms, stores, coffee shops, a large swimming pool and a dance hall.
The center, built and run by Panzhihua Iron & Steel, is the beginning and end of social life in this town. 

Mr. Li walks upstairs to the center's second-floor library, a poorly lit room where he spends many hours leafing through a thin selection of state-controlled periodicals.
He pulls out a newspaper: The Panzhihua Iron & Steel Co. Daily. "It's a good read," Mr. Li says. "Quite informative." Today's lead story: "Manager Zhao Inspects Operation of No. 4 Furnace." 

Not surprisingly in this remote outpost, many of the single factory workers here fall in love with each other. "We have a very small social circle," says Ma Yongjian, the company secretary general. "A lot of the young workers end up getting married." To facilitate such productive arrangements, the factory organizes dances each night, often outdoors on a concrete promenade along the banks of the Jinshajiang River. 

On this evening, the dancers seem reluctant, as a sour eight-piece band plods through a series of Chinese pop songs.
But things come to life when a slender woman in a slinky black dress takes the microphone.
The band starts in, and she begins to sing "Happy birthday to you," even though it isn't anyone's birthday.
Immediately, hundreds of couples leap to their feet and rush onto the floor, dancing their well-rehearsed three-step, cheek-to-cheek.
Happy Birthday, apparently a big hit in Panzhihua, lasts for 10 glorious minutes. 

As the band plays, and with romance in the air, Mr. Li recalls how he came to Panzhihua.
The factory, one of Chairman Mao's oddest follies, dates to 1965.
Mao was sure that the U.S., or perhaps the Soviet Union, was planning to attack China's coast, so he decided to set up vital industries deep in the remote interior. 

Like tens of thousands of others, Mr. Li was ordered to go to Panzhihua, in 1971. "I lived in a straw-and-mud house at the time," he says. "But I was happy to be here, to carry on the fight against the imperialists and the revisionists." Today the perceived threat has passed, but the factory is thriving. 

What keeps Mr. Li in Panzhihua?
Partly the system.
While workers can't easily be fired, they also can't easily quit to find jobs elsewhere.
The Li family could apply for permission to do so, but hasn't tried. "I expect I'll be in Panzhihua for the rest of my life," Mr. Li says. "The No. 1 high school is pretty good, and I have to think of my daughter's future." 

Others have fled the remote factory.
Beginning in 1979, it offered its original settlers a chance to leave.
Many had been forced to come, often leaving their families and possessions behind.
When the opportunity finally arose, thousands of workers departed, including virtually all of the factory's college graduates and senior engineers. 

Ma Zhijie, deputy general manager of the factory's trading department, wants his eight-year-old son to have broader horizons, and believes education is the best ticket out of Panzhihua.
He is pushing his child to excel in school and teaches him English at home. "I dream that my son will attend college and find a good job somewhere else," Mr. Ma says. 

Panzhihua's isolation is immediately apparent.
The area was off limits to foreign visitors and reporters until 1987, and remains effectively sealed off from contact with the outside.
What the factory's workers know of the world comes filtered through the propaganda machine of official newspapers and television, as well as political study sessions.
Workers have a very sketchy knowledge, for example, about the pro-democracy movement, and its bloody suppression, in Beijing this spring. 

At one point, Mr. Li repeats the theme of a recent political study class and harangues his American visitor about U.S. sanctions against China. "The Chinese and American people have great warmth for each other," Mr. Li says, "but I must tell you frankly that I disagree with President Bush's policy toward China." 

His visitor explains that, to many in the U.S., the sanctions were considered too moderate.
Many of these Americans were incensed by the killings in Beijing and denounced the Chinese government. "Well, I certainly didn't know any of that," Mr. Li says, and abruptly closes the conversation. 

As Mr. Li begins his walk back home, he displays a slight limp, the result of a back injury.
Last year, the factory sent him to northeast China to recuperate for six months, all expenses paid.
The factory provides free medical care to all workers and their families.
It runs a modern, 500-bed hospital and eight clinics, supported by $2.5 million a year in subsidies.
When Mr. Li dies, Panzhihua Iron & Steel will pay for his cremation. 

And the next generation will carry on.
At the hospital, Zhong Desheng, the director, dons a doctor's smock and leads a visitor into the maternity ward.
A factory worker who has just given birth to a baby girl lies on a bed, looking bewildered.
Her baby has been snatched up by the nurses and placed alongside nine others, each tied up in a tight cotton bundle. 

Mr. Zhong motions to the wriggling bundles. "These," he says, "are the future workers of Panzhihua Iron & Steel." 

.START 

Four of Britain's biggest banks said they plan to sell jointly owned Yorkshire Bank Group in an auction that could raise between #850 million ($1.33 billion) and #1 billion ($1.57 billion). 

National Westminster Bank PLC, Yorkshire Bank's biggest holder with a 40% stake, said it, Barclays PLC, Lloyds Bank PLC and Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC decided to sell the 250-branch U.K. bank after receiving "a number of approaches" from potential purchasers.
They declined to identify possible bidders. 

At a news conference here yesterday, NatWest officials said they expect potential interest from banks throughout continental Europe, Australia and the U.S. 

Yorkshire Bank, which had pretax profit of #100.4 million and #3.19 billion in assets last year, has Britain's ninth-largest branch network.
It is viewed by market analysts as a potential target for banks aiming to boost their U.K. presence prior to the 1992 development of a single market in financial services in the European Community.
Analysts have said the bank could fetch a price of between 8.5 and 10 times pretax profit -- or between #850 million and #1 billion. 

Bill Barron, a NatWest general manager, said the banks decided to push ahead with the sale despite yesterday's sharp stock-market fall in London because the decision was strategic and independent of market valuations. 

The consortium-ownership arrangement, which dates from a financial reconstruction of Yorkshire Bank in 1911, is outmoded for the increasingly competitive U.K. market, analysts say.
Barclays owns 32%, Lloyds owns 20% and Royal Bank of Scotland owns 8% of Yorkshire Bank. 

