.START 

Richard G. Sim, the man credited with transforming Applied Power Inc. from an underachiever into a feisty player in the global market for hydraulic tools, hopes to guide a similar turnaround at the company's latest acquisition, Barry Wright Corp. 

The 45-year-old former General Electric Co. executive figures it will be easier this time.
But analysts, while applauding the acquisition, say Applied's chief executive faces a tough challenge in integrating the two companies. 

Barry Wright, acquired by Applied for $147 million, makes computer-room equipment and vibration-control systems.
The Watertown, Mass., company's sales have been dormant and its profits have dropped.
Last year's earnings of $1.3 million, including $815,000 from a restructuring gain, were far below the year-earlier $8.4 million. 

Besides spurring Barry Wright's sales, which were $201.7 million in 1988, Mr. Sim must pare its costs and product line. "The question is how long it's going to take Barry Wright to make a contribution," says F. John Mirek, an analyst at Blunt Ellis Loewi in Milwaukee. 

The answer will help determine whether Applied continues to reach the ambitious goals set by Mr. Sim.
The Butler, Wis., manufacturer went public at $15.75 a share in August 1987, and Mr. Sim's goal then was a $29 per-share price by 1992.
Strong earnings growth helped achieve that price far ahead of schedule, in August 1988.
The stock has since softened, trading around $25 a share last week and closing yesterday at $23.00 in national over-the-counter trading.
But Mr. Sim has set a fresh target of $50 a share by the end of 

Reaching that goal, says Robert T. Foote, Applied's chief financial officer, will require "efficient reinvestment" of cash by Applied and continuation of its healthy 19% rate of return on operating capital. 

In Barry Wright, Mr. Sim sees a situation "very similar" to the one he faced when he joined Applied as president and chief operating officer in 1985.
Applied, then a closely held company, was stagnating under the management of its controlling family.
While profitable, it "wasn't growing and wasn't providing a satisfactory return on invested capital," he says. 

Mr. Sim is confident that the drive to dominate certain niche markets will work at Barry Wright as it has at Applied.
He also professes an "evangelical" fervor to develop a corporate culture that rewards managers who produce and where decision-making is shared. 

Mr. Sim considers the new unit's operations "fundamentally sound" and adds that Barry Wright has been fairly successful in moving into markets that haven't interested larger competitors. "With a little patience, these businesses will perform very satisfactorily," Mr. Sim says.
Within about six months, "things will be moving in the right direction," he predicts. 

Mr. Sim figures it will be easier to turn Barry Wright around since he's now in the driver's seat.
When he came to Applied, "I didn't have the power to execute as I do today," he says.
He was named chief executive officer of Applied in 1986 and became chairman last November. 

At Applied, Mr. Sim set growth as his first objective.
He took the company public in an offering that netted Applied about $12.6 million, which helped launch the company's acquisition program.
Sales climbed to an estimated $245 million in fiscal 1989, ended Aug. 31, from $99.9 million in fiscal 1985.
The company expects that earnings, which have marched steadily upward in recent years, reached about $20.8 million, or $1.58 a share, in the fiscal year just ended, up from $15.2 million in fiscal 1988 and $3.9 million in 1985. 

