.START 

Share prices plummeted across Europe yesterday in response to Friday's New York sell-off, but some issues staged a late comeback after Wall Street opened without another rout. 

European investors have further reason for optimism today, after the U.S. rebound. 

The Frankfurt Stock Exchange, which closed before the New York exchanges opened, was the hardest hit of the major European markets, with the DAX Index dropping 12.8%. 

In London, prices plummeted in early trading and were off as much as 9% before coming back strong after the New York opening to close down only 3.2%. 

West German Economics Minister Helmut Haussmann said, "In my view, the stock market will stabilize relatively quickly.
There may be one or other psychological or technical reactions, but they aren't based on fundamentals.
The economy of West Germany and the EC {European Community} is highly stable." 

Paris, which has been the center of speculation fever in recent weeks, also was hard hit.
Share prices fell in Milan, Amsterdam, Zurich, Madrid and Stockholm.
Prices in Brussels, where a computer breakdown disrupted trading, also tumbled.
Following is a breakdown of major market activity: 

FRANKFURT: One of the sharpest declines came in the financial center of Europe's strongest economy.
The DAX Index of 30 West German blue chips plunged 12.8%, a one-day record, wiping out the summer's gains.
The index closed at 1385.72, down 203.56 points. 

By comparison, two years ago on Black Monday, the new index would have dropped 9.4%, according to a projection by the exchange.
Investors may have reacted so strongly to Friday's U.S. stock market loss because they had vivid memories of the Frankfurt exchange's losing 35% of its value in the 1987 crash and its wake. 

This time, however, many small investors may have been hurt by acting so swiftly. "They all went in the wrong direction," said Andreas Insam, an investment adviser for the Bank in Liechtenstein's Frankfurt branch.
He said he told clients to buy selected West German blue chips after they fell by about 10%. 

After the opening was delayed 30 minutes because of the crush of sell orders, Frankfurt's normal two-hour trading session was extended 75 minutes to handle the heavy volume. "The beginning was chaotic," said Nigel Longley, a broker for Commerzbank AG. "It took three-quarters of an hour before enough prices could be worked out to get a reading on the market." 

Institutional investors and bankers, many of whom spent the night before in their offices watching Far Eastern markets, were cautiously optimistic after the mild 1.8% decline in Tokyo stock prices. "Everybody was still confident, including most institutional investors.
That is why everybody was a little surprised by the storm of sell orders from small private investors," said Norbert Braeuer, a senior trader for Hessische Landesbank. 

Some big institutions, including banks, began picking up lower-priced shares late yesterday, but most investors wanted to see what would happen in New York before acting. 

But even if Wall Street continues to stabilize, analysts here say the latest blow to investor confidence could inhibit a swift recovery for the Frankfurt exchange, which already was showing signs of weakness after the DAX had slipped from a 1989 high of 1657.61 on Sept. 8. 

Some of West Germany's bluest chips took some of the biggest hits.
A 16.3% drop for Mannesmann AG and Dresdner Bank AG's 9.6% decline were especially problematic for their respective boards, whose plans for major rights issues in November could now be in jeopardy. 

Dresdner Bank last month said it hoped to raise 1.2 billion marks ($642.2 million) by issuing four million shares at 300 marks each.
Yet yesterday's market cropped Dresdner's share price by 33 marks to 309 marks a share, leaving little incentive for investors to subscribe to the standing price unless the market recovers quickly. 

LONDON: Headed toward a record drop at midday, the London stock market recouped two-thirds of its losses in the wake of New York's early rally. 

The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Share Index closed off 70.5 points, at 2163.4, its high for the day, after having plunged 204.2 points at 12:49 p.m. 

It was big institutions such as Norwich Union Insurance Group, Scottish Amicable Investment Managers and Standard Life Assurance Co. that spearheaded the rally.
Attracted by low prices and encouraged by New York's performance, they scooped up equities across the board. 

Volume was 959.3 million shares, more than triple recent levels. 

PARIS: Late buying gave the Paris Bourse a parachute after its free fall early in the day.
The CAC General Index ended down 5.4% at 523.6, a drop of 29.6 points from Friday. 

"There was a volatility in the market that I have never seen before," said Michel Vigier, a partner in brokerage firm Cholet Dupont. "When Wall Street turned around shortly after the opening, there was panic buying in Paris." 

Brokers said that as the news spread that Wall Street was moving up, traders who had called to place sell orders changed their line in mid-conversation, ordering buys instead. 

Trading was driven primarily by small investors and speculators, with large institutions waiting on the sidelines until late in the day.
When Wall Street turned, however, the big boys entered the market, looking for bargains. 

