.START 

While Friday's plunging stock market prompted new fears about the economy's prospects, a little-known indicator that has faithfully foreshadowed the economy's ups and downs by exceptionally long lead times points to a sustained rise in overall business activity. 

The barometer, developed by analysts at Columbia University's Center for International Business Cycle Research here, reached a record high of 223.0 in August, the latest month available, and the Columbia researchers estimate that it has moved even higher since then. 

The latest reading of 223.0 was up from 222.3 in July and 215.3 as recently as March.
The August rise marked the fifth straight monthly gain for the indicator, which uses the 1967 average as a base of 100. 

In contrast, the Commerce Department's widely followed index of leading indicators, while up in August, has fallen repeatedly since reaching a high early this year.
Its ragged behavior through much of 1989 has prompted some forecasters to anticipate the start of a new recession perhaps before year's end. 

But the far stronger showing of the Columbia index "makes a recession any time soon highly unlikely," says Geoffrey H. Moore, the director of the Columbia facility. 

A leading authority on the business cycle, Mr. Moore also is a member of the Business Cycle Dating Group, the panel of private economists that decides for the government when expansions and recessions begin and end.
The group normally convenes only when a change in the economy's general course seems likely. 

"No meeting is scheduled because the expansion shows no sign of going off the tracks," Mr. Moore reports. 

Based largely on the recent strength in their index, called the long leading indicator, the Columbia analysts foresee uninterrupted economic growth through the rest of this year and next year as well.
They expect a 2.6% rise in 1990 in the gross national product, after adjustment for inflation. 

Underlying this optimism is the index's longstanding ability to signal recessions or recoveries, as the case may be, by substantially greater periods than the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators.
Over the full post-World War II era, the Columbia index, on the average, has entered sustained declines 14 months before the onset of recessions and turned up eight months before recoveries. 

The comparable lead times for the Commerce index, whose components include the stock market, are far shorter -- 10 months before recessions and only three months before recoveries. 

The Columbia economists also have reconstructed how the long leading index would have behaved, had it existed, in 1929, before the stock market crash in October that ushered in the Great Depression.
The indicator reached a peak in January 1929 and then fell steadily up to and through the crash. "It was an entirely different pattern from what we're seeing now," Mr. Moore says. 

A major source of the recent strength in the long leading indicator has been the performance of the Dow Jones corporate bond-price index, which is not a part of the Commerce index.
In August, the bond measure was at its highest monthly average since early 1987.
It also rose last Friday, while the stock market sagged. 

Other components of the long leading indicator include a ratio of prices to unit labor costs in manufacturing industries, the M2 version of the money supply, adjusted for inflation, and the volume of new home-building permits. 

Notably absent from the Columbia index is the stock market, which Mr. Moore says "is simply no longer such a good indicator of the economy's long-range prospects, though it still is useful for anticipating some short-run twists and turns." 

As recently as 1975, the stock market -- as reflected in the Standard & Poor's index of 500 common stocks -- was rated by the National Bureau of Economic Research as the best of the 12 leading indicators that then made up the Commerce index.
It was assigned a mark of 80 out of a possible 100, compared with scores ranging as low as 69 for the other components. 

The stock market has lost some precursory power, analysts at the Columbia center claim, because of the growing impact of international developments. 

"Stocks have become more sensitive to factors not directly tied to the domestic economy," Mr. Moore says, citing the exchange rate for the dollar on currency markets, the foreign-trade balance and inflows of foreign capital.
He also feels that the rise of such computer-based practices as program trading has diminished the stock market's relevancy to the economic outlook. 

