.START 

Dallas investor Harold Simmons, who has been gobbling up Lockheed Corp. shares and only two months ago told this newspaper that he was in the stock for the long term, now insists he wants to sell. 

In an interview published yesterday with the Los Angeles Daily News, Mr. Simmons said: "Lockheed is actually just a decoy.
I have several decoys out there because there's really something else that I want to slip up on.
You've got to put out misinformation if you really want to buy something for a fair price." 

Mr. Simmons, who holds 6.6 million shares, or a 10.43% stake, in Lockheed, added that he isn't at all interested in taking over the Calabasas, Calif., aerospace concern. "Not now and not ever," he told the newspaper. "Actually, I wish I were out of Lockheed.
The defense industry seems to be getting more uncertain all the time.
So I'm a seller.
Put it in big black letters and underline it." 

Lockheed's share price on the New York Stock Exchange has been propped up in recent weeks, despite disappointing earnings, because of Mr. Simmons's interest in the company.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Lockheed slipped $1 in Friday's market slump to close at $48 a share. 

Michael Lamb, who closely tracks Mr. Simmons's holdings for a Kansas City, Mo., firm called Wealth Monitors, said he is skeptical about the stated intention to sell off Lockheed shares.
He added that while one Simmons holding company, Valhi Inc., has sold 272,000 Lockheed shares in recent months, his other companies have bought up 880,000. 

"Does that sound like a seller to you?" Mr. Lamb said yesterday. "It just doesn't make any sense." 

Mr. Simmons couldn't be reached to elaborate, and Lockheed officials couldn't be reached to comment on the Daily News article. 

But Mr. Lamb said it's Mr. Simmons's style to try and leave Wall Street befuddled.
He said Mr. Simmons knows the arbitrage community "can be a detriment by driving the share price up." Mr. Lamb said if the arbitrageurs get confused, maybe they'll move out of the stock and leave more for Mr. Simmons to grab. 

