.START 

From the professional money manager to the big overseas currency player to the little guy with his IRA in a mutual fund, the bulletin from Wall Street came as a shock -- followed swiftly by a sickening recollection of the pattern played out in the '87 crash: a 100-point-plus plunge on a Friday, a weekend of worrying in between, and then disaster on Monday.
Who could be blamed for wondering if it is all happening again, in another nervous October? 

"It's scaring the hell out of me," says Tom Loughlin, a systems analyst and small investor in Boston. 

Friday's events demonstrate that despite all the post-1987 studies and reforms, the stock market can still plunge with dizzying steepness.
The 190.58-point drop was the second-largest in magnitude ever, and the 12th worst on a percentage basis.
But what was most terrifying was its speed: The market dropped 154 points in only 65 minutes, pausing only as the close neared. 

Moreover, this plunge came in a time of relatively benign economic conditions, raising the question of how the markets might react when a serious economic upset, such as a recession, is on the horizon. 

But despite its hair-trigger edginess, whether the market today will in fact mirror 1987 with a further dive is a far different matter.
There are many reasons to think that what appeared Friday is another species of bear, and a less vicious one.
The reasons include the obvious differences in the market between this fall and 1987: Interest rates haven't been rising this time, as they were in 1987; the dollar, though hit Friday, hasn't been eroding dangerously; the economy isn't overheating; and, above all, stocks are far from being as wildly overpriced: They are selling at only about 13 times per-share earnings, compared with about 20 two years ago. 

And this time, the regulators are moving with more dispatch.
The Federal Reserve has already indicated that it will provide the credit needed to see that there isn't a liquidity squeeze today.
Many traders think the Fed will quickly lower interest rates, a move that would be a plus for stocks. 

-- The levels of selling of U.S and foreign stocks in Asian and European markets, which open well before New York's.
In early trading in Tokyo Monday, share prices fell 1.7%.
After the initial slide, the market appeared to be turning around but by early afternoon was headed lower. 

-- Whether the buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp., whose financing failure triggered Friday's free fall, can be put back together.
Late yesterday, it wasn't clear the buyers could make a new bid by today.
The lower UAL opens, the more traders who've bought with borrowed money will have to sell UAL and other takeover stocks to meet margin calls. 

-- The levels of early stock-index futures trading in Chicago.
That market shut down early on Friday, leaving millions of dollars of sell orders unexecuted.
Heavy index-futures selling often pulls the stock market down. 

-- The pressures on mutual-fund companies to sell stock in order to meet demands from customers for redemptions.
On Black Monday, some funds sold hundreds of millions of dollars in stocks after being inundated with redemptions.
But late yesterday, the biggest fund group, Fidelity Investments, said this weekend's redemptions were running at under one-third the level before Oct. 19, 1987. 

-- Any action by the Federal Reserve.
Any move to lower interest rates, for example, would be a positive for stocks, by making fixed-income investments less competitive with them. 

Much as in the 1987 crash, the spark that lit the fuse on Friday was a news announcement that, at first blush, seemed to have little bearing on the market as a whole.
When the UAL buy-out group said it couldn't get bank financing for its $6.79 billion deal, the announcement sent takeover-stock traders scrambling to sell United, other airline stocks and then other real or rumored takeover stocks. 

The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index futures took only 15 minutes from the UAL announcement, at 2:54 p.m., to hit their first "circuit breaker," a 30-minute trading halt that kicks in when the futures drop the equivalent of 100 points on the Dow.
When the futures reopened at 3:30, it took only 15 minutes more for them to hit the next 100-point-equivalency limit, when S&P trading halted for the day. 

At the stock market's 4 p.m. close, the Dow Jones Industrial average was withing 60 points of another circuit breaker.
Had the Dow fallen 250 points, trading on the New York Stock Exchange would have been halted for an hour. 

Many investors say the circuit breakers, instituted following the 1987 collapse, provided little reassurance.
One Big Board specialist complains that the Friday futures halt, which was supposed to give the markets time to regain their equilibrium because futures prices are reported faster, was "ridiculous; anything artificial that gets in the way of this market is very hard to work with." Some traders fear circuit breakers hold the risk of making matters worse, especially if they should halt stock trading.
But Big Board Chairman John J. Phelan Jr. maintains that the safeguards were a success Friday. 

There were also complaints that the specialists on the floor of the Big Board, who are charged with making markets in individual stocks, performed poorly during the plunge.
Trading was halted in 10 stocks when specialists couldn't balance buy and sell orders in some stocks, such as entertainment giant Walt Disney Co.
Seven never reopened. 

One futures executive, Christopher Pedersen of Twenty-First Securities Corp., says the specialists "were not able to handle the imbalances on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange." But James Maguire, chairman of Henderson Brothers Inc., a Big Board specialist, retorts: "It is easy to say the specialist isn't doing his job.
When the dollar is in free fall, even central banks can't stop it." 

One of the most puzzling aspects of Friday's drop was the speed with which the damage to UAL spilled over to other stocks.
Market professionals say that major arbitragers and others such as hedge funds, which were heavily invested in UAL and highly leveraged, couldn't get any cash out of their UAL positions because trading halted.
Once UAL were to reopen, such speculators faced the likelihood of margin calls -- demands from lenders to put up more cash for stock positions bought with borrowed funds.
So such traders quickly tried to raise cash by selling other so-called deal stocks, like AMR (American Airlines) and USAir. 

But then trading was halted because of order imbalances -- there were far more sellers than buyers.
So the "arbs" started dumping positions in their entire portfolios, including major blue-chip stocks that have had large price runups this year, in a desperate race for cash. 

AMR, subject of a $120-a-share bid from Donald Trump, saw trading in its stock halted at $98.625 a share, down $.125, but was quoted in off-exchange trading at only $81.50.
Paramount Communications Inc., the subject of takeover whispers, plunged $6.625 a share to $56.625.
Shares of Hilton Hotels Corp., which has put itself up for sale, nosedived $21.50 to $85 a share. 

The deluge left some investors shaken and angry. "Don't ask me how I am," said Marshall Front, a money manager at Stein Roe & Farnham Inc. in Chicago. "This is incredible.
You have a classic panic." 

Frederick A. Moran, president of Moran Asset Management in Greenwich, Conn., said computer-aided "program traders are the reason we had the last crash, they're the reason we're having this crash, and they're why we'll have the next crash.
They're a total outrage." Stephen B. Timbers, chief investment officer of Kemper Financial Services Inc. in Chicago, agrees that none of Friday's events by themselves added up to a 190-point decline. "Programs took it down.
Without the programs, I can't imagine it would have been down 50," he says. 

Many market professionals say it is still too soon to know whether it was program traders, per se, who were to blame, but they generally agree that the computerized trading programs that have now been embraced by an array of professional investors and money managers accounted for the speed of the drop.
Traders say that Friday's big sellers included Salomon Brothers Inc., which was reportedly executing trades for a client switching from stocks to bonds, and Tudor Investments, a prominent player in the futures markets.
Tudor wouldn't comment; a spokesman for Salomon denied that it was a heavy seller. 

Michael Steinhardt, who only last Monday was threatening a takeover of USAir using his 8.4% stake as a club, says he wished he didn't own the stock when Friday's market left him with a $12.9 million paper loss. "This market is a mile wide and an inch deep," he says.
But Mr. Steinhardt disputed that he had been a heavy seller of other stocks Friday to make up for the USAir losses. 

Several big firms that do index arbitrage, in which traders buy and sell stocks and stock-index futures simultaneously to take advantage of price differentials, say they couldn't execute trades because they couldn't be sure of prices they would get on the stock exchange floor. 

One takeover stock speculator says that with individual investors frightened away from the market, the remaining participants are mainly institutions, all with instant access to the same information, and the same ability to sell in an instant -- that is, until all try to sell at once. 

"If this is something that had happened over the last few weeks, nobody would have noticed," the speculator says. "But now it just happens in an hour.
The information is very quick; it's often inaccurate; and reactions can be irrational." 

The speed of Friday's drop is likely to reinforce the perception of many small investors that the markets are even more of a casino and haven't devised a manner for comfortably handling the awesome forces that technology has heaped upon them.
Despite two years of study, the marketplace remains one where ever-anxious large investors, haunted by memories of the 508-point plunge in 1987 and aided by powerful computers, can turn minor market upsets into major calamities in the space of a few hours. 

Many are quick to emphasize that just because the market can fall as fast as it did Friday doesn't mean it will tank again, despite some disquieting similarities between now and October 1987.
As in 1987, this latest market slide was preceded by sparring between nations and government officials over the dollar. 

In 1987, then-Treasury Secretary James Baker was threatening a big drop in the dollar if West Germany raised interest rates.
This year, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan seemed to warn he wouldn't lower interest rates merely to keep the dollar within an agreed-on exchange range. 

In another similarity to 1987, the government was threatening a crackdown on highly leveraged takeovers.
Then it was House Budget Committee Chairman Daniel Rostenkowski threatening to eliminate the tax deductibility of interest for certain debt-financed takeovers.
This year it was Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner voicing concern about airline buy-outs and threatening to force changes in the United deal. (Some think another Washington factor this time was the Senate's failure to pass capital-gains tax cut.) 

But market observers point out that long-term government bond interest rates, currently at 7.85%, are 2.5 percentage points lower than the level that prevailed in October 1987, when interest rates had been rising for most of the year. 

Another difference this year is that stocks' price-earnings ratios are much lower, which implies that they may not be so overpriced.
In 1987, the average P-E ratio fell from a peak of more than 20 to about 13 just after the crash.
This year, the average ratio was 14 at the market peak one week ago, and finished Friday at 13. 

On the other hand, one reason those ratios were so high in 1987 was that the stock market had been anticipating an enormous rise in corporate earnings, which did in fact occur.
Between 1987 and 1989, those profits were projected to rise by 50%.
But now those earnings are hitting a plateau.
Just last week a string of earnings disappointments unnerved some market participants.
Next year, earnings are expected to inch up only 2.4%. 

Another factor that has been dominating the thinking of many stock analysts is the current plight of the junk-bond market.
Although UAL, the second-largest leveraged buy-out ever, was to have been financed with bank debt instead of junk bonds, its failure to obtain financing focused attention on the entire market for leveraged deals, underscoring just how dependent the entire market has become on junk bonds.
Many stocks owe at least part of their market valuation to the perception that they could soon be the subject of a takeover or buy-out.
Attention is focused on the so-called breakup value of the stock in the hands of an imagined acquirer who would buy the company at a big premium, perhaps planning to sell it piece by piece. 

Takeover specialist Carl Icahn, whose 13.1% stake in USX Corp. lost $151.2 million in value on Friday, says the stock market's downturn may reflect the end of a speculative period that has generated many leveraged buy-outs that now face problems as a result of weakness in the junk-bond market. "While a number of LBOs are fine, there are also many where the cash flow cannot pay the interest, but {that} instead are based on the buyer selling divisions to a greater fool to pay off the debt," Mr. Icahn says. 

However, Mario Gabelli, a takeover-stock investor, says that while some of the most speculative deals may now prove impossible to finance, "Companies are still going to buy companies around the world." 

As on any day on Wall Street, there are plenty of people who think the market will go up, and plenty who predict a downturn. "My advice is to buy," says Elaine Garzarelli, a market-timing expert at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., who warned clients of danger just before the 1987 crash.
She compares the current drop-off to 10%-12% corrections in 1978 and 1979. 

And Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady says the market's drop Friday ought to be seen in the context of a 28.7% runup in the Dow since Jan. 1 of this year.
In addition, the stocks as a whole are up 60% from the day after the 1987 crash.
Since the market hit a record level of 2791.41 on Monday, it has declined by 222.15 points, or 8%.
Most of that occurred on Friday. 

Some think the selling has a way to go.
James Awad, president of BMI Capital Corp. in New York, says that despite the more favorable valuation levels, stocks could still tumble several hundred points in the event of a breakdown in "the internal structure of the market." 

Although professionals were bracing themselves for some heavy early selling on overseas markets, many didn't detect any widespread panic over the weekend among U.S. institutions and individual investors. 

Many mutual funds have big cash reserves -- which they lacked in 1987 -- as a cushion against a possible cascade of telephone sell orders today.
Fidelity, which was forced to sell $800 million of stocks in the 1987 crash, has quadrupled the cash level of the giant Magellan fund.
The Boston firm says redemptions in stock funds since the Friday market drop have equaled less than 15% of those funds' total cash position of about $2 billion. 

"Two years ago there were massive redemption levels over the weekend and a lot of fear around," says C. Bruce Johnstone, who runs Fidelity's $5 billion Equity-Income Fund. "This feels more like a one-shot deal -- people aren't panicking." 

Liquidity also appears to be far healthier than it was in 1987, when a lack of it brought the financial system close to break-down.
Over the weekend, Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan phoned officials in the U.S. and abroad to reassure them that the Fed was prepared to inject massive amounts of money into the banking system if needed to prevent a financial crisis.
And Mr. Phelan, the Big Board's chairman, says that the exchange hasn't turned up any capital problems among its 49 specialist firms, suggesting that the Big Board will have the capacity to make orderly markets even if volume is heavy. 

