.START 

Tokyo share prices dropped sharply in early Monday morning trading following Wall Street's plunge on Friday.
After the initial slide, the market appeared to be turning around but by early afternoon was headed lower. 

At 1:30 p.m. Tokyo time, the Nikkei index of 225 selected stocks was off 1.4%, or 482.39 points, to 34633.63.
In the first 20 minutes of trading in the morning, the Nikkei index had fallen 611.62 points or 1.7%, as nervous investors sold large capital issues. 

Traders remained guarded.
Yoshiro Inoue, an analyst at Nomura Securities Co., described the steep decline in the beginning as "a New York shock." He predicted that "there would be no steep recovery but at the same time there would be no further decline." 

Said a Japanese equities trader at Jardine Flemings Securities Ltd., in Tokyo: "There is still a lot of weakness and nervousness in the market." 

Last Friday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 190.58 points to close at 2569.26, its worst loss in points since the October 1987 crash.
The announcement that a group of takeover bidders for UAL Corp. had failed to raise enough money to acquire the U.S. airline was one of the main factors that triggered the sell-off, analysts said. 

World stock markets, bracing over the weekend for a sharp fall in share prices Monday, were watching Tokyo closely for signals.
How far share prices fall in other markets will depend to a great extent on how the Tokyo market reacts, analysts and investors said. "I'm hoping Japan holds tight," said Allen Wheat, head of trading at Bankers Trust Co. in London, before the Tokyo opening. "But if Japan is wobbly, London will probably take a beating." 

Prior to the Tokyo opening, few were expecting panic to set in, mainly because today's market conditions are different from those that led to the world-wide downward spiral in October 1987. 

The French market could be harder hit than the London market, European analysts said, because recent unmaterialized takeover speculation in Paris has left some blue-chip stocks poised for markdowns. "Paris has had an awful lot of froth in the past two weeks and so is probably going to be hit a bit worse than London," said David Band, chief executive officer of Barclays Bank PLC's Barclays de Zoete Wedd investment banking unit. 

The Tokyo market's opening behavior seemed to be in line with predictions that a blood bath could be avoided.
Analysts in Tokyo had said over the weekend that a drop is unavoidable, but they predicted that Japan's traditionally cautious institutional investors will keep things from spinning out of control. "The Tokyo market can't help but go down," said Hiroaki Hanao, deputy general manager of the equity department at Daiwa Securities Co. "But it won't be such a big crash." 

The Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan appear to be eager to put out the fire before it spreads.
Japanese newspapers reported Saturday that the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan view the plunge on Wall Street as a result of U.S. domestic concerns about financing acquisitions, not as a sign of weak economic fundamentals. 

There were also rumors that the Japanese financial authorities warned large brokerage firms and institutional investors over the weekend against taking any hasty actions Monday.
How effective such guidance might be remains to be seen.
One analyst said that with all eyes on the Japanese market it will be difficult this time for the Finance Ministry to try anything that could be seen as artificially propping up the market. 

As Japanese investors prepare for some rough waters this week, they will be paying close attention to the foreign exchange markets. "Tokyo is most worried about the currency," said Daiwa Securities' Mr. Hanao.
If the yen rebounds against the dollar, he said, there is less chance of an additional increase in interest rates, which could help stabilize Tokyo share prices. 

Last Wednesday, the Bank of Japan raised the discount rate 0.5 percentage point to 3.75% to stem the dollar's rise.
Of ficials said they were concerned that a weaker yen will contribute to greater inflation in Japan.
In New York trading on Friday the dollar dropped 1.4% to close at 142.10 yen.
Dealers are expecting the dollar to be skittish, as the market waits for U.S. authorities to indicate their monetary policy plans.
The dollar opened in Tokyo at 139.95, down 4.05 from last Friday's Tokyo finish. 

Despite currency market concerns, analysts stressed that Tokyo market conditions today aren't what they were in 1987.
Then, many market watchers in the U.S. worried that the highly speculative Tokyo market would be the one to send world markets reeling.
Now, many look to Tokyo as a potential stabilizing factor because of its resilience and quick recovery following Black Monday.
Analysts say one point in Tokyo's favor this time is the fact that for the past several weeks the market has been in relatively low gear, driven by fundamental concerns about earnings and interest rates rather than wild speculation.
On Friday, the Nikkei index rose 320.97 to close at 35116.02.
Trading volume has also fallen off in recent weeks. "A lot of the speculative fat has been trimmed," said one analyst. 

Some analysts predict that Japanese institutions may look at this as a good time to hunt for bargains.
Many Japanese funds, which closed their books at the end of September, now have huge cash positions. "There's still lots of idle money sitting around here," said Hiroshi Ohira, chief analyst at New Japan Securities Co., citing a frequently stated reason for Tokyo's strength. 

Said another foreign stock analyst: "All the Japanese brokers will try to look for the positive aspects of this." 

Whatever happens in Tokyo, the powerful ripple effects are sure to be felt first in other Asian markets.
A severe drop in Japanese stock prices or a steep fall in the dollar would exacerbate price declines in smaller markets such as Hong Kong, money managers say. 

In Hong Kong, brokers and fund managers expect the widely watched Hang Seng index, which closed Friday at 2782.30, to shed at least 100 points, or 5%.
Some think a sharper decline is possible.
The Hang Seng index opened at 2736, down 46.3 points, or 1.7%. 

Investors have already been treating the market with some caution.
In late May and early June, when political turmoil overwhelmed China, the Hang Seng index plummeted 37% to 2093. (Hong Kong reverts to China in 1997.) Since then, international fund managers decreased their exposure to the market and only recently have begun to tiptoe back in. 

"It's not like Õthe crash inå October 1987, when there was lots of optimism," said Phillip Niem, research director in Hong Kong for British-based Hoare Govette Asia Ltd. "This time around there's lots of caution.
People are already scared.
Institutions' weighting in Hong Kong are low now anyway." 

After a 108-point decline in the Dow Jones industrials on Friday, Oct. 16, 1987, the Hang Seng index plunged 420.81 points, or 11.3%, the following Monday.
Later that day Black Monday unfolded in New York, and officials closed the Hong Kong exchange for four days, a move that shook investor confidence in the market.
This time around, government and market officials said, the territory's revamped equity market will remain open regardless of what happens in New York today. 

London's stock market, already wheezing under stresses of its own, is also casting a nervous eye toward Tokyo and bracing for a shock. 

Many London traders planned an allnight vigil on developments in the Tokyo market. "A lot of our guys will be sitting up all night at home, and a couple of our guys will be in the office overnight," said Mr. Wheat of Bankers Trust. 

Authorities, including the Bank of England and the Securities Association, are gearing up in case a crisis wallops the London market.
The bank was in touch with other major central banks over the weekend and was preparing to make capital available to dealers if needed, as it did in the 1987 crash, according to people familiar with the bank's strategy. 

However, in an unusual public statement, the bank sought to play down any note of crisis.
Said a spokesman: "There's no reason for such an exaggerated fall in London, where share values aren't underpinned in the same degree as New York by highly leveraged situations." 

The Securities Association, which regulates London's stock markets, said that if prices plunge today all dealers will be ordered to report their capital and market positions daily. "We're monitoring things very closely," a spokeswoman said. 

Even before Friday's New York nosedive, the London market had been facing heavy uncertainty because of worries over the British economy.
After the one-point rise Oct. 5 to 15%, Britain's base interest rate stands at its highest level in eight years.
Many economists have been predicting that the country's economic growth will be little more than 1% in 

Responding to the developments, the Financial Times 100-share index, which had been slightly higher most of the day, closed at 2233.9, down 3.9 points from Thursday. 

The impending stock market troubles could pose a dilemma for already embattled Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson.
A market plunge in Britain could bring pressure for him to lower interest rates.
But a rate cut could weaken the recently depressed pound, which late Friday staged a sharp rally against the dollar after news of the New York market sell-off. 

One person who firmly believes London is headed for trouble no matter what happens elsewhere is Peter Thompson.
This widely followed stock market forecaster achieved fame by predicting, in July 1987, the October crash of that year.
Mr. Thompson, a consultant to Barclay de Zoete Wedd Securities Ltd., jolted the London market last Monday by predicting that another bear market is at hand. 

"London will open lower {today} whether or not Tokyo opens lower," Mr. Thompson said in an interview. "Market makers will mark down prices so bears can't go short to them at too advantageous a price." By going short, a market pessimist sells borrowed shares in the hope of buying them back later at a profit. 

Any big drop in London prices will further cool the already jaded British appetite for leveraged buy-outs, analysts said. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

