.START 

The dollar's fall on Friday could signal a new bout of weakness for the U.S. currency and -- if it declines much further -- possibly the end of the U.S. currency's long-term climb that began in early 1988. 

"The entire sentiment has changed; the dollar bulls definitely have been shaken," says Jack Kessler, senior vice president in charge of New York foreign-exchange operations for Chase Manhattan Bank. 

He and others cite Friday's plunge in U.S. stock prices and the narrowing difference between interest rates in the U.S. and some of its major trading partners, particularly West Germany and Japan.
Many analysts also suspect that the Federal Reserve has begun to reduce interest rates and could go further.
Lower interest rates usually diminish a currency's appeal to international investors and speculators. 

By very late in New York on Friday, the dollar had tumbled to 1.8655 West German marks and 141.50 yen -- its lows for the day -- from 1.9083 marks and 144.17 yen on Thursday.
The British pound rose to $1.5840 from $1.5523 a day earlier. 

In Tokyo Monday, the dollar opened for trading at 139.30 yen, down from Friday's Tokyo close of 144 yen, and 1.8340 marks down from Friday's close of 1.8720.
By late morning, the dollar had recovered somewhat and was trading at 140.90 yen and 1.8535 marks. 

"If the stock market keeps going down on Monday, you're going to see a lot of people selling dollars," says Robert Fio Rito, a trader at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago.
He added: "The mark is a good place to be." 

In the short-run, the dollar's fate depends largely on the performance of the U.S. stock market today as well as the Fed's and other central banks' reaction to what happens in all world equity markets, say traders and analysts. 

Not only does the dollar play a key role in determining the direction and health of the U.S. economy, but the speed with which it rises or falls is also of major concern to U.S. and foreign policy makers. 

A precipitous fall by the dollar could reignite U.S. inflationary pressures by raising the price of imports and prompting U.S. manufacturers to increase domestic prices. 

But if the U.S. currency were to decline in a controlled manner, it would contribute to the four-year effort by the U.S. and its major trading partners to reduce the U.S. trade deficit and correspondingly large Japanese and West German surpluses.
That's because a weaker dollar makes U.S. exports less expensive while raising the price of imports to American consumers. 

Furthermore, in the current stock market climate, the dollar is the wire through which foreigners telegraph their preference -- or distaste -- for U.S. securities and signal their confidence in the American economy and financial system. 

If foreigners dump U.S. stocks and return to the safety of their home markets -- as they did in October 1987 -- they must simultaneously also sell dollars for their own currencies.
Those transactions, in turn, could weaken the dollar.
Even if foreigners just withhold from buying additional U.S. securities, they reduce the demand for dollars. 

Conversely, when foreigners buy American securities, they increase the demand for the U.S. currency.
However, foreigners who merely sell their American shares and buy U.S. bonds don't affect the exchange rate. 

Initially on Friday, the dollar shot up in early New York activity after both the producer price index and retail sales for September came out higher than most analysts expected. 

Traders concluded that U.S. interest rates would remain firm, and the dollar quickly climbed to its intraday highs of 1.9140 marks and 144.80 yen. 

But the rally quickly fizzled under the weight of trader chagrin that the currency hadn't risen further, profit-taking and unconfirmed reports that the Fed was selling dollars. 

A few hours later with the dollar trading at 1.8895 marks and 143 yen, the stock market began plunging, taking the U.S. currency with it.
Surprisingly, while trading was hectic, dealers say that volume was unexpectedly moderate. "You're talking about a really thin and volatile Friday the 13th," says Carmine Rotondo, chief corporate dealer for Security Pacific National Bank. 

"The decline of the dollar was more a function of market makers dragging bids down than people massively selling," adds Richard Witten, vice president in charge of foreign-exchange operations at Goldman, Sachs & Co. 

From its intraday highs four weeks ago, the U.S. currency has fallen almost 7% against the mark and 5% against the yen.
In Friday's trading alone the dollar fell more than 2.5% against the mark and 2.3% against the yen from its high in early New York trading.
Currently, the dollar stands close to the upper limits of its so-called Louvre trading ranges of 1.70-to-1.90 marks and 120-140 yen, within which most traders and economists believe the Group of Seven major industrial countries have tried to keep it since February 1987.
The G-7 includes the U.S., Japan, West Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada. 

"For all of its unfortunate aspects, Friday's events make it easier for the G-7 process to continue," says Robert Feldman, an international economist at Salomon Brothers Inc. 

He added:"Until Friday morning, market people were contending that further interest-rate hikes were necessary to keep the dollar bulls from running over {the central banks}; there seemed to be a sense of the dollar bulls coming back and taking control again." 

In the past week and a half, major European countries -- led by West Germany and Japan -- raised official domestic interest rates, mostly to keep their currencies from falling further and to stem the inflationary impact of those declines. 

Mr. Feldman added: "But that's not the way things look now; the G-7 have some breathing room." 

Analysts say that the dollar's future depends on whether U.S. stock prices keep falling; whether the Fed is forced to ease credit to ease any crisis; whether foreign equity markets also fall, and how central banks abroad react to those circumstances. 

Many dealers are betting that the Fed will have to ease monetary policy, if it hasn't already.
The questions are how much and under what circumstances. 

"If nothing happens abroad and the Fed is forced to ease here to calm markets, the dollar is going to go down; there would be a flight to quality as people start to worry about the U.S. financial system," says Michael D. Andrews, a vice president at Merrill Lynch & Co.
The dollar, he adds, "could take a pretty big hit," if the Fed were perceived as "being in a very difficult situation where it was fighting a fire." 

In fact, Mr. Andrews and some other traders and analysts say that it isn't impossible to paint a scenario where the Fed might have to intervene to support the dollar.
Analysts believe that the Fed can tolerate a dollar as low as 1.80 marks, a level at which U.S. companies are competitive in overseas markets and yet isn't too inflationary domestically. 

Much depends on how foreigners react.
If they merely sell American shares and buy U.S. bonds, that won't affect the dollar.
But if, as in October 1987, they dump dollar-denominated securities and run to foreign markets, they will increase pressure on the dollar to fall. 

Some of that already began on Friday. "Many of the banks in the U.S. called their counterparts in the Far East and Europe," says Chase Manhattan's Mr. Kessler. 

"And dealers who had gone home in the Far East and Europe long dollars started selling when they were awakened during the night and told that the stock market was down, that Fed funds were at 8 3/4% and that the Fed might begin to ease," Mr. Kessler adds. 

Salomon Brothers' Mr. Feldman says that further evidence of foreign selling was the dollar's plunge Friday at the same time the bond market was rallying -- which hasn't occurred in months. "That may be a signal of a turning point in the strategies of international portfolio managers," he says. 

Harris Trust's Mr. Fio Rito predicts that "an equity market hit will trigger further liquidation; with the Japanese and Germans raising {interest} rates, the fundamentals changed for the dollar." 

Indeed, Salomon's Mr. Feldman notes that in September yields on three-month Eurodollar deposits were 1.5 percentage points more than on three-month marks.
By late Friday, that spread had narrowed to 0.19 percentage point. "People began to question shifting {funds} for differences this small," he adds. 

Many dealers are looking to see if the dollar tumbles below 1.85 marks, a key psychological and technical level to the many traders who use charts to predict currency movements. "It breaks through 1.85, then you begin to question whether the dollar's long-term uptrend that began in early 1988 is still in place," says Merrill Lynch's Mr. Andrews. 

The dollar isn't without its boosters, who point to reduced U.S. budget and trade deficits as well as its value as a so-called haven currency in a world rife with political instability. 

"I see a stronger dollar mid to long-term," says Gilles Bazy-Sire, a first vice president at Societe Generale Securities Corp. in New York.
He says that based on the price of a similar basket of goods and services in major industrial countries, the dollar currently "is very cheap." That, he says, "should increase the demand for dollars" by investors who want to buy real U.S. assets, such as real estate and companies. 

Dollar doubters point to the prospects of a bumpy U.S. stock market at best, and the prospect of lower U.S. interest rates.
What's more, many forecasters predict that the U.S. trade deficit will begin to widen again in 1990.
In fact, many analysts estimate that the trade gap for August -- to be released tomorrow -- widened to as much as $9.6 billion from $7.6 billion the previous month. 

Barring a catastrophe in the U.S. stock market, Mr. Kessler believes that the dollar in the near term should weaken further to about 1.8650-1.8850 marks and 142-143.50 yen.
But he adds: "My gut feeling is that we can even see it go lower." 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York Friday, gold for current delivery settled at $363.30 an ounce, down 10 cents.
Estimated volume was a light two million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Monday, gold was quoted at about $368.27 an ounce, up $2.81 an ounce from Saturday's close of $365.46. 

