.START 

ARBITRAGE: Technically, the simultaneous buying and selling of related securities to take advantage of small differences in price.
The term has come to be applied to buying stocks in companies that are, or are rumored to be, takeover targets. 

INDEX ARBITRAGE: The simultaneous trading in stock-index markets and the underlying groups of stocks to take advantage of temporary discrepancies in prices. 

JUNK BONDS: High-yielding, high-risk debt securities rated double-B or lower by the credit-rating agencies. 

LEVERAGED BUY-OUT: The purchase of a company by a small group of investors financed largely by debt, often junk bonds. 

MARGIN CALL: A demand upon an investor to put up more collateral for securities bought on credit.
The lender, usually a bank or brokerage firm, makes the call when the equity in the investor's account falls below a standard set by a stock exchange or firm. 

OPTIONS: A "put" option permits a holder to sell a stock at a specified price within a limited period.
A "call" option permits an investor to buy stock at a specified price within a limited period.
An index option lets the investor buy or sell the "basket" of stocks represented by a stock-market index. 

PORTFOLIO INSURANCE: A method of hedging a stock portfolio, usually by selling futures contracts on stock indexes when the market falls. 

STOCK-INDEX FUTURES: Contracts for future delivery of an amount of cash based on an index of stock prices, such as the Standard & Poor's 500 index or the Major Market Index.
A trader buying a December S&P 500 stock-index futures contract at a price of $200 today, for instance, would be agreeing to take delivery next month of 500 times that amount in cash, or $100,000.
Traders would almost always close out that position by selling an offsetting futures contract. 

If the stock market -- and correspondingly the stock index -- rose before the trader closed out his position, he would make a profit because he could sell an offsetting contract at a higher price, taking in more money than he had to spend.
If the market fell, the trader would lose money because he would have to sell an offsetting contract at a lower price.
Futures are used to hedge against fluctuations in stock prices or to speculate on market moves. 

(The Major Market Index encompasses 20 blue-chip stocks, including 17 that are also in the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Futures on the MMI are traded on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Options on the index are traded on the American Stock Exchange.) 

