.START 

The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether a federal court, in an antitrust lawsuit filed by state officials or private parties, may dismantle a merger that it has ruled anti-competitive. 

The high court agreed to hear the state of California's challenge to the legality of the acquisition of Lucky Stores Inc., a supermarket chain, by American Stores Co. which owns another chain, Alpha Beta Stores Inc. 

Under federal antitrust law, the Federal Trade Commission and the Justice Department have the authority to ask a federal court to order the divestiture of a merger that has been completed but has been found to be anticompetitive. 

But even after the federal agencies have approved a merger, federal antitrust law allows states or other affected parties to sue to challenge the merger on the grounds that it is anticompetitive.
Federal appeals courts, however, disagree whether federal courts have the authority to order the break up of completed mergers in such private antitrust lawsuits. 

While the high court tries to resolve the disparate views of the appeals courts, American Stores remains under a temporary order to operate the two supermarket chains as separate businesses. 

American Stores' bid for Lucky Stores began as a hostile offer.
But when the tender offer was increased, Lucky's directors approved the merger and, in June 1988, American Stores' $2.5 billion purchase of Lucky Stores was completed. 

The FTC reviewed the merger and, in August 1988, approved a settlement between the FTC staff and American Stores.
While the settlement was under review by the FTC, the staff required American Stores to run the Lucky and Alpha Beta chains separately. 

Meanwhile, California officials, arguing that the merger would cost the state's consumers $400 million annually in higher prices, sued in federal court in September 1988.
A federal judge in Los Angeles, after a hearing but before a trial was held, reached an initial conclusion that the merger was anti-competitive.
He then issued a preliminary injunction ordering American Stores to continue to run the two chains separately. 

A federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled in March that the district court's order had the same effect as requiring divestiture of one chain by American Stores.
The appeals court said federal courts lack the authority to require divestiture in private antitrust lawsuits. 

In August, Supreme Court Justice Sandra O'Connor issued a temporary stay, requiring the separate operations to continue until the high court could decide whether to hear the case. (California vs.
American Stores Co.) 

Court in Brief 

In other action yesterday, the high court: 

-- Agreed to decide whether people arrested for drunken driving must be advised of their right to decline to answer questions and to consult a lawyer before police may videotape them to preserve a record of their condition. (Pennsylvania vs.
Muniz) 

-- Agreed to decide whether a federal court may fine a lawyer for filing a frivolous lawsuit although the lawyer and client voluntarily dismiss the lawsuit. (Cooper & Gell vs.
Hartmarx Corp.) 

Right-to-Die Appeal 

The Bush administration, in a friend-of-the-court brief, said that the Constitution gives states broad flexibility to require that medical patients in permanent, vegetative conditions continue to receive artificial feeding and fluids.
The brief, filed by Solicitor General Kenneth Starr, said the family of a Missouri woman in such a vegetative state doesn't have the constitutional right to insist the state cut off artificial feeding. 

The brief makes roughly the same argument the government made last week in a brief urging more leeway for states to restrict abortions.
The brief filed yesterday says state regulations need only be "reasonable" to withstand federal court review, an easy standard for states to satisfy.
Moreover, the brief is critical of arguments for a constitutional right to privacy, saying any right for competent individuals to refuse medical treatment should be rooted in tradition and based on the 14th Amendment "due process" protection of "liberty," not on "abstract notions" of privacy, which the Constitution doesn't mention. 

Abortion Case 

Organizations supporting the constitutional right to abortion filed a friend-of-the-court brief in two Supreme Court cases in behalf of an unprecedented number of groups.
The brief, coordinated by the American Civil Liberties Union and Planned Parenthood Federation of America, was filed in behalf of 274 groups, although many of them were small community religious organizations rather than national in membership.
The brief argued that the 1973 decision recognizing the right to abortion, Roe vs.
Wade, was correct and shouldn't be reconsidered. 

