.START 

Chicken Chains Ruffled 

By Loss of Customers 

FAST-FOOD chicken chains, faced with a worsening business slump, are struggling to hatch some new marketing strategies. 

The Crest Report, which tracks consumer purchases, says customer traffic at chicken restaurants fell 10% in the second quarter, while the overall fast-food customer count was down 2%. 

Chicken business is off largely because of more competition from grocery-store convenience food, home-delivered pizza and other takeout fare, says a spokesman for the report, a publication of NPD Group, a market research firm in Port Washington, N.Y. 

The loss of more customers is the latest in a string of problems.
Church's Fried Chicken Inc. and Popeye's Famous Fried Chicken Inc., which have merged, are still troubled by overlapping restaurant locations. 

Chicken chains also are feeling more pressure from McDonald's Corp., which introduced its McChicken sandwich this year and recently tested the sale of individual pieces of chicken. 

New management at Kentucky Fried Chicken, a unit of PepsiCo Inc., has fought back with new medium and large chicken sandwiches for the lunch crowd.
And the chain is testing products that aren't fried, such as "char-grilled" chicken, to try to win health-conscious consumers. 

Kentucky Fried Chicken also is testing home-delivery of chicken, which could be a hit with stay-at-home diners.
But some fast-food industry analysts say problems with keeping chicken warm and fresh must be solved first. 

A Kentucky Fried Chicken spokesman, however, disputed the notion that the delivery service experienced problems in some markets where testing has been discontinued.
He says the test is continuing in Chicago, Columbus, Ohio, and a few other cities. 

The advertising industry is buzzing with rumors that Kentucky Fried Chicken will drop Young & Rubicam and seek a new ad agency.
But the company declines to comment. 

Emanuel Goldman, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst, predicts Kentucky Fried Chicken will post an 11% drop in 1989 net income. "They've been laggard," he says, "but they'll have to become more aggressive." 

Reluctant Advertisers 

Try Soft-Sell Spots 

CALL IT un-advertising.
Pittsburgh consultant David Bear is selling a soft approach to clients who want exposure yet shun pushy ads. 

His ploy: 60-second radio spots that offer helpful hints.
The only plug for the sponsor is a brief mention at the end of the spot. 

The messages resemble the Business Traveler, a daily dose of travel tips developed by Mr. Bear and sponsored by travel agencies in several major cities. 

New un-advertisers include Burt Hill Kosar Rittlemann Associates, a Butler, Pa., architectural firm.
Its radio series features such spots as "Floodlights: Evening Wear for Urban Structures" and "Building a Place to Park." A harder sell, says John Kosar, the firm's president, would "detract from the profession." 

Hospitals have signed up to use the messages to promote fundraisers, and Equitable Gas Co. is considering the format to offer energy tips to consumers. 

But such spots can be too soft. "There's always a risk of lost messages," says John Fitzgerald, chairman of Ketchum Advertising USA, which created similar radio spots for Pittsburgh National Bank. "It's a question of how much credibility you gain for the possible loss of recognition." 

Retailer Sees Pitfalls 

In Environmental Push 

HERE'S a retailer that's getting tough in the push for environmentally safe packaging and products. 

Big Bear Supermarkets Inc., a grocery chain based in San Diego, plans to display shelf cards and distribute pamphlets recommending products deemed safe for the environment.
The choices will be based on research by the San Diego Environmental Health Coalition and will include products like Murphy's Oil Soap and other noncorrosive cleaners. 

But the chain is quickly realizing the pitfalls of such endorsements.
For example, it recommends nonchlorinated dishwasher detergent and puts Sunlight on its environmentally safe list. 

That doesn't thrill Procter & Gamble Co., maker of Cascade dishwasher detergent.
A company spokesman questioned the validity of the list, noting that chlorine is present in all major dishwasher detergents.
In fact, Lever Bros. confirms that its Sunlight brand does contain chlorine bleach, even though it isn't listed on the label for the powder version.
Thomas G. Dahlen, Big Bear's executive vice president, said the chain is still reviewing its product list to avoid such problems. "Our intent is to promote the best alternative," he says. "And it's important that we be accurate." 

But in the end, customers' wishes are what will prevail.
Big Bear doesn't care for disposable diapers, which aren't biodegradable.
Yet parents demand them.
Says Mr. Dahlen, "We'll still be forced to sell items we might not philosophically agree with." 

Odds and Ends 

NEATNESS does count -- at least in the grocery store. 

A study by Safeway's Scanner Marketing Research shows soap sales climbed 5% when bars were neatly stacked on shelves instead of dumped in a wire basket. . . . Which celebrity endorsers are most believable?
For the third year in a row, consumers voted Bill Cosby first and James Garner second in persuasiveness as spokesmen in TV commercials, according to Video Storyboard Tests, New York.
Michael J. Fox replaced Bruce Willis in third place; Cher placed fourth for the second time. 

