.START 

You know what the law of averages is, don't you?
It's what 1) explains why we are like, well, ourselves rather than Bo Jackson; 2) cautions that it's possible to drown in a lake that averages two feet deep; and 3) predicts that 10,000 monkeys placed before 10,000 pianos would produce 1,118 publishable rock 'n' roll tunes. 

Baseball, that game of the long haul, is the quintessential sport of the mean, and the mean ol' law caught up with the San Francisco Giants in the World Series last weekend.
The team that dumped runs by the bushel on the Chicago Cubs in the National League playoffs was held to just one in two games by the home-team Oakland A's, the gang that had been done unto similarly by the Los Angeles Dodgers and Orel Hershiser in last year's tournament.
Morever, much of the damage was accomplished by A's who had some catching up to do. 

In game two, on a cool Sunday evening in this land of perpetual autumn, a lot of the catching up was done by the A's catcher, Terry Steinbach.
He hit a 2-0 pitch from Rick Reuschel into the left-field stands in inning four to stretch his team's lead from 2-1 to a decisive 5-1, where it stayed.
So what if Steinbach had struck just seven home runs in 130 regular-season games, and batted in the seventh position of the A's lineup. "If you get your pitch, and take a good swing, anything can happen," he later remarked. 

On Saturday night, quite a few of the boys in green and gold salted away successes to salve the pain of past and, no doubt, future droughts.
Mark McGwire, the big, red-haired Oakland first baseman, had three hits in four at bats, two more than he'd had in the five-game Dodger series in which he'd gone 1-for-17.
The A-men batting Nos. 6 through 9, a.k.a. the "bottom of the order," got seven of their team's 11 hits and scored four of its runs in a 5-0 decision. 

Right-hander Dave Stewart held the Giants to five hits to account for the zero on the other side of the Saturday ledger.
That he was the A's winningest pitcher during its American League campaign with a 21-9 mark, plus two wins over Toronto in the playoffs, indicates he may have some evening up coming, but with the way his split-fingered fastball is behaving, that might not be this week.
The same goes for Mike Moore, another veteran who overcame early struggles to permit the Giants but a run and four hits in seven innings in Sunday's contest. 

"Every guy they put out there had a better split-finger than the guy before," marveled Giant manager Roger Craig.
He's an ex-hurler who's one of the leading gurus of the fashionable delivery, which looks like a fastball until it dives beneath the lunging bat. 

The upshot of the downshoot is that the A's go into San Francisco's Candlestick Park tonight up two games to none in the best-of-seven fest.
The stat to reckon with here says that about three of four clubs (29 of 39) that took 2-0 Series leads went on to win it all.
That's not an average to soothe Giant rooters. 

One might think that the home fans in this Series of the Subway Called BART (that's a better name for a public conveyance than "Desire," don't you think?) would have been ecstatic over the proceedings, but they observe them in relative calm.
Partisans of the two combatants sat side by side in the 49,000-plus seats of Oakland Coliseum, and while they cheered their favorites and booed the opposition, hostilities advanced no further, at least as far as I could see. 

A few folks even showed up wearing caps bearing the colors and emblems of both teams. "I'm for the Giants today, but only because they lost yesterday.
I love 'em both.
The only thing I'm rooting for is for the Series to go seven games," said David Williams, a Sacramento septuagenarian, at the Coliseum before Sunday's go. 

The above represents a triumph of either apathy or civility.
I choose to believe it's the latter, although it probably springs from the fact that just about everyone out here, including the A's and Giants, is originally from somewhere else.
Suffice it to say that if this were a New York Yankees-Mets series, or one between the Chicago Cubs and White Sox (hey, it's possible), you'd need uniformed police in every other seat to separate opposing fans, and only the suicidal would bifurcate their bonnets. 

Anyway, the A's gave you a lot of heroes to root for.
In the opening game, besides Steinbach and Stewart, there was Walt Weiss, a twiggy-looking, second-year shortstop who had lost a couple months of the season to knee surgery.
He was flawless afield (ditto in game two), moved a runner along in the A's three-run second inning, and homered for his team's final tally.
Such is his reputation among the East Bay Bashers that when he hit his first career home run last season, the fan who caught it agreed to turn the ball over to him in return for an autograph.
Not his autograph; power-hitter McGwire's. 

An A's co-hero of the second game was Rickey Henderson, who exemplifies the hot side of the hot-cold equation.
He smoked Toronto in the playoffs with six hits, seven walks and eight stolen bases in 22 at bats, and continued that by going 3-for-3 at the plate Sunday, along with walking, stealing a base and scoring a run. "When you're in the groove, you see every ball tremendously," he lectured. 

The cold guys in the set were Will Clark, Kevin Mitchell and Matt Williams, the Giants' 3-4-5 hitters.
They combined for 25 hits, six home runs and 24 runs batted in in the five games against the Cubs.
They went a collective 5-for-24 here, with zero homers and ribbies. 

It's that last set of numbers, as much as anything else, that gives the Giants hope in the Series games to come. "I believe in the law of averages," declared San Francisco batting coach Dusty Baker after game two. "I'd rather see a so-so hitter who's hot come up for the other side than a good hitter who's cold." 

But the old Dodger slugger wisely offered no prediction about when good times would return to his side. "When it goes, you never know when you'll get it back," he said. "That's baseball." 

