.START 

Influential0xd5 members of the House Ways and Means Committee introduced legislation that would restrict how the new savings-and-loan bailout agency can raise capital, creating another potential obstacle to the government's sale of sick thrifts.

The bill, whose backers include Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.), would prevent the Resolution Trust Corp. from raising temporary working capital by having an RTC-owned bank or thrift issue debt that wouldn't be counted on the federal budget.
The bill intends to restrict the RTC to Treasury borrowings only, unless the agency receives specific congressional authorization. 

"Such agency `self-help' borrowing is unauthorized and expensive, far more expensive than direct Treasury borrowing," said Rep. Fortney Stark (D., Calif.), the bill's chief sponsor. 

The complex financing plan in the S&L bailout law includes raising $30 billion from debt issued by the newly created RTC.
This financing system was created in the new law in order to keep the bailout spending from swelling the budget deficit.
Another $20 billion would be raised through Treasury bonds, which pay lower interest rates. 

But the RTC also requires "working" capital to maintain the bad assets of thrifts that are sold, until the assets can be sold separately.
That debt would be paid off as the assets are sold, leaving the total spending for the bailout at $50 billion, or $166 billion including interest over 10 years. 

"It's a problem that clearly has to be resolved," said David Cooke, executive director of the RTC.
The agency has already spent roughly $19 billion selling 34 insolvent S&Ls, and it is likely to sell or merge 600 by the time the bailout concludes. 

Absent other working capital, he said, the RTC would be forced to delay other thrift resolutions until cash could be raised by selling the bad assets. "We would have to wait until we have collected on those assets before we can move forward," he said. 

The complicated language in the huge new law has muddied the fight.
The law does allow the RTC to borrow from the Treasury up to $5 billion at any time.
Moreover, it says the RTC's total obligations may not exceed $50 billion, but that figure is derived after including notes and other debt, and subtracting from it the market value of the assets the RTC holds. 

But Congress didn't anticipate or intend more public debt, say opponents of the RTC's working-capital plan, and Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) said the RTC Oversight Board has been remiss in not keeping Congress informed. 

"That secrecy leads to a proposal like the one from Ways and Means, which seems to me sort of draconian," he said. "The RTC is going to have to pay a price of prior consultation on the Hill if they want that kind of flexibility." 

The Ways and Means Committee will hold a hearing on the bill next Tuesday. 

