.START 

Congressman Lee Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat who chairs the the Joint Economic Committee, plans hearings next week on his bill to subject the Fed to greater political control.
The Fed already is experiencing political pressure to supply lower interest rates and easy money.
Former Senator William Proxmire has called the Hamilton bill the most dangerous economic legislation now before Congress, because it would give U.S. economic policy a further inflationary bias.
It isn't given much chance of passing, but its mere existence is cause for anxiety. 

The U.S. and the world are not in need of new doubts about the future soundness of the dollar.
Attempts in late September to drive the dollar down through central bank interventions were ill-timed, particularly since we now know that the dollar was then in the process of taking another dive relative to oil and other producer goods.
The sharp rise in the September Producer-Price Index announced Friday fueled the stock market debacle. 

The Hamilton bill would put the Treasury Secretary on the Fed's board and Open Market Committee, which charts monetary policy.
More worrisome, Congress would have a stronger supervisory role, with the Fed audited by the General Accounting Office, which Congress runs. 

Those sound like innocuous changes, but they're not.
Both the Treasury and Congress traditionally have pushed for easy money, the Treasury to reduce its debt management problems and Congress to satisfy powerful producer constituencies who want a weak dollar for short-term competitive gains in world markets.
Congressional pressures on the Fed similar to those that produced the savings and loan mess are an awful thought. 

Even now, the Fed cannot simply thumb its nose at the President and Congress.
But it can resist.
Paul Volcker found subtle ways to take his case to the people, with good results. 

Easy money advocates, however, are adept at spreading economic myths.
There is the constant insistence that the Fed could lower interest rates were it not so obstinate.
The Fed indeed can lower short-term interest rates by pumping reserves into the banks, but it can't do much about them from there on.
If the reserves generate inflation, which is what the Fed fears most right now, interest rates will go up as lenders demand a premium.
Enough inflation can ultimately even wipe out the bond market, as it did in Britain in the 1970s, thereby crippling the economy. 

The other myth is that inflation generates economic growth.
It may do that temporarily but it also sows the seeds for stagnation. 

These two myths have caused the republic untold damage.
The U.S. economy took on an inflationary bias when the Fed was forced to finance an incredible spending spree by Lyndon Johnson.
Richard Nixon exacerbated the problem when, in response to pressures from Congress, he applied price and wage controls in August 1971, thereby discouraging production.
Jimmy Carter ultimately hired Mr. Volcker to kill inflation, which was reaching dangerous levels.
He did, too late to save Mr. Carter from forced retirement. 

But all that was a long time ago and politicians have a way of forgetting such things.
The 1970s inflation yielded great benefits to some producer interests, including Arab sheiks, at the expense of the American middle class.
It was a classic example of how inflation transfers income to the wealthy from the middle class.
That explains why there are always powerful political interests pushing for a soft currency.
In some countries, Argentina for example, those interests have overwhelmed the government and what remains of a middle class. 

The claim that inflation generates economic growth is seductive.
In fact it does the opposite.
As the charts show, the 1975-80 inflation destroyed both productivity and economic growth (see accompanying charts -- WSJ Oct. 17, 1989).
It was only after Mr. Volcker killed inflation, at the cost of a sharp but brief recession, that growth and productivity started rising once more.
Producers were forced by the discipline of sound money to slash away organizational fat and acquire more efficient equipment.
After having performed that admirable feat, however, they were back in 1985 demanding a dollar devaluation that would make it still easier for them to compete in international markets.
They got the devaluation and, as is usually the case, began picking up fat again.
So now they want another one. 

Many corporate executives don't understand or don't want to understand that their own companies eventually become victims of such policies.
Inflation destroys capital investment.
Corporate depreciation reserves lose value relative to equipment replacement costs.
Investors are reluctant to invest long term.
Corporations, in effect, decapitalize themselves.
That was reflected in the stagnant stock market of the 1970s.
Strikes increase as workers demand raises to cope with rising prices, make up for what they already have lost and hedge against what they will lose in the months ahead.
Productivity falls, and weaker production further fans inflation.
The middle class gets poorer, and the poor feel greater pain than ever.
All of which explains why stock and foreign exchange markets get jittery when the Fed comes under political pressure.
Particularly so when it comes at a time when the Fed has done well.
When it tightened up last spring, the price indexes fell and the economy began to pick up speed again, which is of course exactly counter to the "inflation-fuels-growth" theory. 

But not all the news is bad.
Rep. Stephen Neal (D., N.C.) wants Congress to instruct the Fed to do one thing: prevent inflation.
Nothing could be more to the point. 

