.START 

"Circuit-breaker" trading halts on this city's futures and options exchanges may have speeded the stock market's fall on Friday. 

Stock-index futures trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and stock-index options trading on the Chicago Board Options Exchange initially closed within a few minutes of each other Friday afternoon.
But trading in the nation's most active stock-index option on the CBOE didn't reopen for the day.
As a result, options traders were forced to sell elsewhere, driving futures and stock prices lower, traders said.
And when trading in the Chicago Merc's stock-index futures had finally halted for the day as well, sell orders cascaded onto the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, adding to the rout. 

What's more, in anticipation of the trading halts many traders -- worried about being unable to trade at lower prices -- sold futures and options contracts, thereby knocking prices still lower. 

The wildly fluctuating markets appeared to have claimed at least one victim.
Fossett Corp., an options-trading firm, said last night that it is transferring all of its customer accounts to First Options of Chicago.
Stephen Fossett, president and sole owner of the company, said that he was making the transfers as a result of a substantial cash squeeze stemming from numerous calls for cash and margin money on Friday by several stock-option and futures exchanges. "All of our obligations were met," Mr. Fossett said. 

Although few other trading firms here or in New York appeared to be in immediate financial difficulty, Friday's volatility also underscored the need for exchanges in Chicago to hasten the common clearing of futures and options contracts, traders said. 

"I'm very disappointed.
The trading halts in futures and options may have done more harm than good," said Jeffrey Tabak, a partner in the investment firm of Miller Tabak Hirsch & Co., and a member of the presidential commission that recommended intermarket circuit breakers be adopted. 

The situation "is clearly uncorrected," said Glenn W. Clark, a Washington, D.C., author on the futures markets. "All {a trading halt} does is smooth the movement." 

The stock-index futures and options also are likely to weigh heavily on the stock market this morning.
The S&P 500 index future that expires in December closed at 328.85, nearly five index points below the 333.65 closing price of the S&P 500 index itself, which is based on the value of the 500 stocks in the index. 

The wide discount of the index futures price against the actual index may tempt program traders, who profit from price discrepancies between stocks and futures, to buy the relatively cheap futures and sell stocks, sending the stock market still lower.
That selling could pull futures prices lower as well, triggering another round of program selling. 

Traders emphasized, however, that the price relationship between stocks and futures could change substantially by this morning's start of trading, based on trading overnight in Japan, an influx of new orders or other events. 

Trading first halted in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index futures contract on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange at 2:07 p.m. CST, after the contract had fallen 12 index points.
It reopened at 2:30 p.m., but traded freely for only 15 minutes before hitting its daily limit of 30 points below the previous day's close.
Sporadic trading occurred at that level for the next half-hour until the contract's normal closing time of 3:15 p.m. 

The trading halts' main effect, as designed, was to permit the stock market to catch up with the futures markets.
When the Merc imposed its first halt in the S&P 500 futures contract after the 12-point drop, the stock index on which the contract is based went down from eight points to 13 points, roughly in line with the futures contract. 

But conflicting steps by some Chicago exchanges caused consternation among traders.
Chicago Board Options Exchange officials, for instance, halted trading in their S&P 100-stock index option contract, as expected, shortly after the Merc imposed its initial trading halt.
The CBOE decided not to reopen the nation's largest stock-index option market after the S&P 500 index contract reopened and halted again a short time later. 

The CBOE said in a statement that "the interests of fair and orderly markets wouldn't be served by a resumption of trading." But some options traders said they were furious that they had been denied a chance to trade while other markets were open. 

The CBOE action also may have driven prices lower in the Chicago Merc's huge S&P 500 index futures pit, traders said.
As much as 25% of the volume in S&P 500 futures on most days comes from CBOE traders hedging their risks in the options markets.
With their own market closed late Friday, some options traders deluged the S&P 500 futures pit with sell orders to hedge their frozen options positions, traders said. 

As a result, one of the largest options-trading firms in the country offered to sell 1,000 S&P 500 contracts at the limit of 30 index points below the previous day's close, an S&P 500 futures trader said.
That offer and others like it killed any chance of a late rally and drove down stock-index futures prices to the daily limit, the trader added. 

With the Chicago markets closed, traders were left with no choice but to "bang the bids {sell stocks} in New York," Mr. Tabak said. 

The Major Market Index futures contract on the Chicago Board of Trade, traded much less actively, touched its daily limit of 50 points below the previous day's close several times Friday, but bounced back slightly and never halted trading. 

To provide an added cash cushion to compensate for the increased price volatility in their markets, the Chicago Merc required traders to increase the margin, or amount of cash they put up to trade S&P 500 contracts, by one-third to $12,000 a contract from $9,000, effective this morning.
The Board of Trade doubled margin requirements for the Major Market Index futures to $8,000 a contract. 

Officials of the exchanges said they communicated well with each other and with government regulators during Fri day's sell-off, compared with the sense of chaos that prevailed at times on Black Monday two years ago.
But while top offi cials are talking, the exchange's clearing arms are still largely in the dark about the financial risks their members may be exposed to in other markets. 

The Chicago Merc has begun limited cross-margining of stock-index futures accounts with the Options Clearing Corp., which processes all options trades for U.S. exchanges.
But for the most part, stock, options and futures markets still each have different clearing and margin systems.
That means that brokers and institutions trading on several exchanges face different cash requirements on each, making it extremely difficult during a crisis for an exchange to ascertain a firm's overall, or net, financial position. 

Just such a cash squeeze two years ago, at a leading Wall Street firm that was facing duplicate margin calls for futures and options positions, led several studies of the markets to call for the coordinated margining of positions in different markets. 

