.START 

EAST GERMANS RALLIED as officials reportedly sought Honecker's ouster. 

In what was considered the largest protest in the Communist state's 40-year history, at least 120,000 demonstrators marched through the southern city of Leipzig to press demands for democratic freedoms, opposition activists said.
Police didn't intervene.
Meanwhile, as the first of more than 1,300 East Germans trying to flee to the West through Poland renounced their citizenship, a West German newspaper reported that regional Communist officials demanded the dismissal of hard-line leader Honecker. 

Secretary of State Baker, in a foreign policy speech, called for the reunification of Germany, saying it was the "legitimate right" of the German people. 

Gorbachev blamed the Soviet Union's press for contributing to the nation's mounting problems.
At a meeting Friday, the Kremlin leader complained about recent articles that raised the possiblity of civil unrest, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by publishing stories about impending shortages. 

House-Senate conferees approved a permanent smoking ban on domestic airline routes within the continental U.S. and on flights of less than six hours to Alaska and Hawaii.
The curbs would cover all but a small percentage of flights, and represent an expansion of the current ban on flights of less than two hours. 

E. Robert Wallach was sentenced by a U.S. judge in New York to six years in prison and fined $250,000 for his racketeering conviction in the Wedtech scandal.
Wallach, an associate of ex-Attorney General Meese, was found guilty in August of taking $425,000 in illegal payoffs from the now-defunct defense contractor. 

NASA resumed the countdown for today's launch of the space shuttle Atlantis, and a federal appeals court in Washington dismissed a lawsuit by anti-nuclear groups to delay the flight because the plutonium-powered Galileo space probe was aboard.
The space agency said it didn't expect weather or protesters to block the liftoff. 

The Bush administration is preparing to extend a ban on federal financing of research using fetal tissue, government sources said.
A temporary prohibition was imposed in March 1988.
While anti-abortion groups are opposed to such research, scientists have said transplanting such tissue could be effective in treating diabetes. 

Delegates from 91 nations endorsed a ban on world ivory trade in an attempt to rescue the endangered elephant from extinction.
Five African nations, however, said they would continue selling the valuable tusks. 

Mubarak held reconciliation talks with Gadhafi at the Egyptian resort of Mersa Metruh.
It was the Libyan leader's first trip to Egypt in 16 years.
They announced a reduction in formalities for travel, but didn't show any real signs of resuming full diplomatic ties.
The Egyptian president said he would visit Libya today to resume the talks. 

Seoul and Pyongyang reached a tentative agreement to allow visits between families on the divided Korean peninsula.
Such family reunions would be the second since 1945.
Differences remained between the North and South Korean governments, however, over conditions for the exchanges. 

Freed black nationalists resumed political activity in South Africa and vowed to fight against apartheid, raising fears of a possible white backlash.
The nation's main white opposition party warned that the government's release Sunday of eight black political prisoners risked bringing chaos and eventual black Marxist rule to the nation. 

The White House said Bush is "fully satisfied" with CIA Director Webster and the intelligence agency's performance during the Oct. 3 failed coup in Panama.
The Washington Post reported that unidentified senior administration officials were frustrated with Webster's low-profile activities during the insurrection and wanted him replaced. 

Poland's legislature approved limits on automatic wage increases without special provisions for food price rises.
The vote was considered a test of the Solidarity-led government's resolve to proceed with a harsh economic-restructuring program. 

Norway's King Olav V installed a three-party non-Socialist government as Gro Harlem Brundtland's three-year-old Labor regime relinquished power.
The 19-member cabinet is led by Prime Minister Jan Syse, who acknowledged a "difficult situation" since the coalition controls only 62 seats in Oslo's 165-member legislature. 

El Salvador's government opened a new round of talks with the country's leftist rebels in an effort to end a decade-long civil war.
A spokesman said the guerrillas would present a cease-fire proposal during the negotiations in Costa Rica that includes constitutional and economic changes. 

The State Department said there was a "possibility" that some Nicaraguan rebels were selling their U.S.-supplied arms to Salvadoran guerrillas, but insisted it wasn't an organized effort.
Separately, Secretary of State Baker complained about a U.N. aide who last week told the Contras to disband as part of a regional peace accord. 

Died: Cornel Wilde, 74, actor and director, in Los Angeles, of leukemia. . . . Danilo Kis, 54, Yugoslav-born novelist and essayist, Sunday, in Paris, of cancer. 

