.START 

Britain's Blue Arrow PLC intends to change its name to Manpower PLC and write off a chunk of the nearly $1.2 billion in good will realized in the takeover of U.S.-based Manpower Inc. 

Blue Arrow Chairman Mitchell Fromstein said in an interview that the two steps may be a prelude to reincorporating the world's biggest employment-services group in the U.S. Mr. Fromstein disclosed the planned steps, expected within a few months, as Blue Arrow posted a 2.5% drop in its third-quarter pretax earnings. 

The name change and good will write-off could help solidify Blue Arrow's dominance of the U.S. temporary-help market and give it a more American image as U.S. investors turn jittery about foreign stocks after Friday's market plunge.
U.S. holders now own more than 60% of Blue Arrow compared with 9% last January. "In the U.S. market, the recognition of the Manpower name is infinitely stronger than Blue Arrow," Mr. Fromstein said. 

The moves also could erase shareholders' perception of Blue Arrow as a company in turmoil. "It further reinforces the concept that Blue Arrow is a thing of the past," said Doug Arthur, an analyst at Kidder Peabody & Co. in New York.
The proposed changes "all make a lot of sense to me," he added. 

In a widely publicized boardroom coup, Mr. Fromstein ousted Antony Berry as Blue Arrow chief executive in January, a month after Mr. Berry had forced Mr. Fromstein out as the $1 million-a-year chief of Milwaukee-based Manpower.
Mr. Fromstein solidified his control in April by taking over from Mr. Berry as chairman. 

But the Blue Arrow tumult isn't over yet, as the British government is investigating a disputed #25 million ($39.4 million) loan which Mr. Fromstein has said was made under Mr. Berry's direction. 

Blue Arrow was able to pull off the $1.34 billion takeover of Manpower in 1987 largely because different British and American accounting standards produce higher reported earnings for British companies.
Under British rules, Blue Arrow was able to write off at once the $1.15 billion in good will arising from the purchase.
As a U.S.-based company, Blue Arrow would have to amortize the good will over as many as 40 years, creating a continuing drag on reported earnings. 

Good will is the excess of cost of an acquired firm, operating unit or assets over the current or fair market value of those assets. 

But with so many shares now held in the U.S., Blue Arrow reports its earnings two ways, based on both U.K. and U.S. accounting standards. "Our balance sheets look like they came from Alice's wonderland," Mr. Fromstein said.
The British version shows "a handful of pounds of net worth" following the 1987 write-off of good will, while the American version reflects "$1 billion of net worth because almost none of {the good will} has been written off." 

Mr. Fromstein said he hopes to eradicate some of the good will left on Blue Arrow's U.S. books in one fell swoop, but wouldn't specify how much.
People close to Blue Arrow suggested the write-down would represent a sizable chunk, with executives claiming prior management overstated the extent of Manpower's good will. 

That move, along with the return to the Manpower name, could bolster the company's prospects during possibly difficult times for temporary help.
The number of U.S. temporary workers fell about 1% in the 12 months ending Aug. 31, after sliding nearly 3.5% in July, said Kidder Peabody's Mr. Arthur. 

Blue Arrow blamed the pretax profit drop in the quarter ended July 31 partly on slower earnings growth of non-Manpower units in Britain.
Overall, pretax profit slid to #18.49 million in the quarter from #18.98 million a year earlier. 

