.START 

The Federal Reserve gave comfort to the financial markets yesterday by allowing a key interest rate to drift downward. 

In addition, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan attempted to calm the markets by denying reports he was publicly feuding with the Treasury. 

The Fed allowed the key federal funds interest rate to dip to about 8 5/8% from its levels of just below 9% last week.
That was a sign to financial markets that, at least for now, the Fed was easing its grip on credit.
Because the markets remained relatively calm, however, the Fed didn't have to inject massive amounts of money into the banking system, as it did in October 1987. 

The fed funds rate is the rate banks charge on loans to each other.
The Federal Reserve can heavily influence that rate by buying and selling securities to financial institutions. 

"I view this morning's action as hand holding for the financial markets," said Steven Wood, an economist with Bank of America.
He said the Fed showed it was willing to provide more money to the financial system, but it wasn't clear "how much or for how long." 

Mr. Greenspan appeared in public briefly yesterday morning to deliver a speech to the American Bankers Association convention here.
In a brief comment before the speech, he said he was "surprised" that some people interpreted his recent comments in Moscow "as endeavoring to say something about current monetary or foreign exchange policies." While visiting Moscow last week, the Fed chairman had warned that "attempts to maintain unrealistic exchange rates" may be destabilizing -- a comment some interpreted as criticism of the Treasury's efforts to push down the dollar. 

"I hope my colleagues at the Gosbank {the Soviet central bank} don't misinterpret anything I said today," the Fed chairman joked before beginning the prepared text of his speech. 

Mr. Greenspan also tried to reassure the markets by saying that "we at the Federal Reserve are watching the financial markets rather closely." He said the Fed was coordinating its activities with foreign officials, and that "coordination exists at a detailed level here in the U.S. among the Federal Reserve, the SEC, the CFTC and the Treasury." 

The Fed's move to ease credit wasn't an aggressive one, but it did signal a clear change of policy from before the stock market's swoon.
Government officials say it's unclear, however, where the bellwether fed funds rate, which influences other interest rates, will come to rest.
If the financial markets continue to show nervousness, the Fed may keep it close to 8 5/8%.
If problems quickly disappear, the Fed may nudge the rate up to 8 3/4. 

Bush administration officials were pleased with the Fed's action, and shared Mr. Greenspan's view that there was close coordination among the various government agencies. 

On Sunday, for instance, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady held a lengthy meeting with Mr. Greenspan and SEC Chairman Richard Breeden to evaluate information on Friday's market plunge.
At that time, they concluded that the drop was concentrated among takeover stocks, and that there were no fundamental reasons it should turn into a rout Monday morning. 

The administration also benefited from the expertise of Treasury Undersecretary Robert Glauber and Assistant Secretary David Mullins, two former Harvard professors who had headed up the Brady Commission's effort to investigate the 1987 crash.
The two men studied the order imbalances in the stock markets and the level of stock index futures to determine what might happen Monday morning.
That led administration officials to predict, accurately, that on Monday the market would have to drop 60 to 100 points before any recovery could begin. 

Some analysts have said disagreements between the Treasury and the Fed added to an environment that allowed Friday's steep market decline to occur.
For weeks prior to the market's drop, the Treasury had been urging the Fed to bring down short-term interest rates, and the Fed had been resisting.
Also, Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson and Wayne Angell, another member of the reserve board, had objected, in a vote made public Oct. 6, to the Treasury's efforts to push down the dollar by selling currency in foreign exchange markets. 

Mr. Greenspan was also known to be privately unenthusiastic about the Treasury's orders for massive dollar sales.
His comments in Moscow last week were interpreted by some as a subtle attempt to make those concerns public. 

Separately, David Ruder, who left the chairmanship of the Securities and Exchange Commission two weeks ago, says investors should view market volatility as a fact of modern market life. 

"I do not regard the amount of the decline on Friday as unexpected or unlikely," he said in a telephone interview. "With the market being up to 2,700 or 2,800 and the existence of derivative products . . . one can expect volatility of the magnitude we had." 

But he asked that institutional investors take a socially responsible role in supporting the market. "Institutional investors bear a responsibility to not only not sell but to step up and buy without waiting for the market to bottom," Mr. Ruder said. 

Mr. Ruder, now a professor at the Northwestern University School of Law in Chicago, also expressed concern about two pauses in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange futures pits after prices had fallen and circuit breakers kicked in.
Noting that the Dow Jones industrials continued to fall as the futures were spared further carnage, Mr. Ruder said, "I think that's something that needs to be looked at very carefully." 

Kevin G. Salwen contributed to this article. 

