.START 

Take $10 out of your wallet.
That's how much the collapse of Lincoln Savings & Loan will cost you and every other American.
Liquidating the Irvine, Calif., thrift will drain the federal deposit insurance fund by more than $2.5 billion, making it the largest thrift failure in history.
Now, finally, there may be an investigation to explore how five senatorial shills helped perpetuate this fiscal black hole. 

Back in June, we recounted how five U.S. Senators -- Alan Cranston of California, Dennis DeConcini and John McCain of Arizona, John Glenn of Ohio and Donald Riegle of Michigan -- intervened with regulators to ease up on Lincoln, whose risk-fraught loans were more worthy of a casino than a federally insured thrift. 

Last Friday, Common Cause, a political-reform lobby, asked for a Senate Ethics Committee probe of the five Senators.
It wants both an outside counsel to conduct the probe and a parallel Justice Department investigation, things it has not initially asked for in previous ethics cases.
Perhaps Common Cause has come to recognize that Congress is generally incapable of investigating itself. 

Charles Keating Jr., the chairman of American Continental, Lincoln's parent company, needed the Senators' help in his running battle with federal regulators.
He admits he made large contributions to each of them so they would "take up my cause." In one case, 57 Keating executives gave $66,100 to Senator Riegle at the same March 1987 fund-raiser.
Mr. Riegle later returned the money. 

In April 1987, the Senators,, absent Mr. Riegle, asked to meet with Ed Gray, then head of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, and according to Mr. Gray, unsuccessfully pressed him to drop a key regulation detrimental to Lincoln -- "a clear subversion of the regulatory process." Senator McCain now calls the meeting "improper" and after several previous denials, Senator Cranston now admits the regulation probably came up.
Days later, the four senators -- joined by Mr. Riegle -- met with other regulators to press Lincoln's case. 

Senators Glenn, Riegle and McCain apparently stopped doing favors for Mr. Keating after that, but Senators Cranston and DeConcini persisted, intervening on behalf of Lincoln until just before its closure this year. 

It now turns out that at least four of the five Senators may have been indebted to Mr. Keating far beyond mere campaign contributions: 

-- The Arizona Republic reports that two of Senator DeConcini's top aides received more than $50 million in real-estate loans from Lincoln. 

-- Senator McCain recently reimbursed Mr. Keating for $13,400 in previously unreported airplane trips, and revealed that his wife and father-in-law invested $359,100 in a Keating shopping-center partnership in 1986. 

-- Senator Cranston solicited $850,000 in contributions from Mr. Keating for three "nonpartisan" voter-registration groups, which some former employees now say were fronts for the Democratic Party. 

-- Senator Glenn solicited $200,000 in contributions from Mr. Keating for a political committee he controlled that paid him to travel around the country.
Some $43,000 was used for the Glenn Senate campaign -- a possible violation of federal election law. 

The lack of attention to the Keating drama is astonishing in light of the magnitude of the savings-and-loan disaster.
The S&L bailout promises to cost the taxpayers some $200 billion, with Lincoln accounting for $2.5 billion alone.
By contrast, the extensively covered HUD political scandals may cost the taxpayers $2.0 billion, the centerpiece being a $0.0003 billion check to James Watt, the legality of which seems to be uncontested. 

Similarly, the spate of dubious prosecutions in finance obscures the seriousness of the allegations against Mr. Keating and his associates.
This is not a matter of whispering "bunny." The 160-page civil suit filed against Mr. Keating last month by the Resolution Trust Corp., the vehicle for the S&L bailout, traces a clear thread.
Money was taken into Lincoln, for example by selling $250 million in uninsured debentures near retirement communities, and allegedly taken out of the parent company by insiders, for example by the sale of their personal stock to the company's employee stock ownership plan.
The case remains to be tested in court, of course, but if the allegations hold up the Senators were defending a classic scam. 

Common Cause isn't the only body that thinks the Keating Five's interventions deserve scrutiny.
The House Banking Committee has voted to subpoena Mr. Keating and top federal regulators to testify about Lincoln.
The hearings begin tomorrow, and will focus on why thrift regulator M. Danny Wall, a former Senate staffer, overruled staff recommendations to close Lincoln and transferred regulatory oversight of Lincoln to Washington.
Between April, 1987, when the five senators intervened, and April, 1988, when Lincoln was finally closed, the losses to taxpayers grew by some $1.5 billion. 

It was Common Cause's demand last year for a House Ethics Committee probe of Speaker Jim Wright that prompted the committee to hire Richard Phelan as an outside counsel.
Mr. Phelan found that Mr. Wright had improperly intervened with federal regulators on behalf of S&Ls, but the Ethics Committee disagreed, saying such actions were an integral part of a Member's job and it could not second-guess "the technique and personality of the legislator." If the Senate Ethics Committee chooses to investigate, it will be interesting to see if it reaches the same conclusion in the case of the five Senators. 

